DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S
    ANTI-OEDIPUS

                   Continuum Reader's Guides
Continuum's Reader's Guides are clear, concise and accessible
introductions to classic works of philosophy. Each book explores
the major themes, historical and philosophical context and key
passages of a major philosophical text, guiding the reader toward
a thorough understanding of often demanding material. Ideal for
undergraduate students, the guides provide an essential resource
for anyone who needs to get to grips with a philosophical text.

           Reader's Guides available from Continuum
Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics - Christopher Warne
Berkeley's Three Dialogues - Aaron Garrett
Deleuze and Guattari’s Capitalism and Schizophrenia - Ian
  Buchanan
Hegel's Philosophy of Right - David Rose
Heidegger's Being and Time - William Blattner
Hobbes’s Leviathan - Laurie M. Johnson Bagby
Hume's Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding - Alan Bailey
  and Dan O'Brien
Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion - Andrew Pyle
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason - James Luchte
Kant's Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals - Paul Guyer
Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding - William
  Uzgalis
Locke's Second Treatise of Government - Paul Kelly
Mill's On Liberty - Geoffrey Scarre
Mill's Utilitarianism - Henry West
Nietzsche's On the Genealogy of Morals - Daniel Conway
Plato's Republic - Luke Purshouse
Spinoza's Ethics - Thomas J. Cook
Wittgensteins Philosophical Investigations - Eric James
Wittgensteins Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus - Roger M. White

DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S
    ANTI-OEDIPUS
     A Reader's Guide

      IAN BUCHANAN

         continuum

      Continuum International Publishing Group
      The Tower Building                  80 Maiden Lane
      11 York Road                        Suite 704
      London SE1 7NX                      New York, NY 10038
      www.continuumbooks.com

                          © Ian Buchanan 2008

   All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
    transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval
      system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.

                           First published 2008

            British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
  A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

                      ISBN-10: HB: 0-8264-9148-0
                               PB: 0-8264-9149-9
                    ISBN-13: HB: 978-0-8264-9148-0
                             PB: 978-0-8264-9149-7

             Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
                            Buchanan, Ian, 1969-
  Deleuze and Guattari's Anti-Oedipus: a reader's guide / Ian Buchanan.
                                   p. cm.
             Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
    ISBN 978-0-8264-9148-0 — ISBN 978-0-8264-9149-7 1. Deleuze,
  Grilles, 1925-1995. 2. Guattari, Felix, 1930-1992. 3. Deleuze, Grilles,
 1925-1995. Anti-Œdipe. 4. Social psychiatry. 5. Schizophrenia-Social
               aspects. 6. Capitalism-Social aspects. I. Title.
                              RC455.B83 2008
                                362.2'6—dc22
                                                              2007023443
              Typeset by Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Manchester
         Printed and bound in Great Britain by MPG Books Ltd,
                           Bodmin, Cornwall

For Bent Meier S0rensen

This page intentionally left blank

                       CONTENTS

Acknowledgements                                    viii
A note on the text                                   ix
Abbreviations                                         x

1 Deleuze and Guattari in Context                     1
  When Gilles met Felix                               2
  May '68                                             7
  Algeria, Vietnam, Italy ...                        12
2 Overview of Themes                                 20
  Theory and Praxis                                  23
  Renovating Psychoanalysis                          27
3 Reading the Text                                   38
  Desiring-Machines                                  38
  Psychoanalysis and Familialism: The Holy Family    64
  Savages, Barbarians, Civilized Men                 88
  Introduction to Schizoanalysis                    116
4 Reception and Influence                           133

Notes                                               140
Further Reading                                     152
Bibliography                                        158
Index                                               165

                             vii

                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would particularly like to thank Hanjo Berressem and all the students who attended the 'Got no pappamummy' workshop on whom
I tried out a number of the ideas this book develops. I must thank,
too, Claire Colebrook, William Connolly, Sarah Campbell (my very
patient editor), Martin Fuglsang, Fredric Jameson, Christian
Kerslake, Gregg Lambert, John Marks, Negar Mottahedeh, Paul
Patton, Adrian Parr, Patricia Pisters, David Rodowick, Marc Rolli,
Horst Ruthrof, David Savat, Daniel W. Smith, Bent Meier S0rensen,
Marcel Swiboda, Nick Thoburn and James Williams - each, in their
own way, stimulated me to see Deleuze and Guattari's work
differently. None can be blamed for how differently I've seen things.
   Again, I must thank Tanya Buchanan . . . we've gone a long way
baby, you and I.
   Special thanks, too, to Courtney and Sebastian who mostly kept
the noise down, mostly.

                                                  Cardiff, May 2007

                                 viii

                  A NOTE ON THE TEXT

This book is a sequel to Deleuzism. It provides more detail on the
connection between Deleuze's work and dialectics, a connection that
I'm no longer the only one to see. But it also tries something
different, which I call 'practical Deleuzism'.

                                ix

                        ABBREVIATIONS

Page references given within the text are first to the English translation and second the original French. It should be noted that the new
Continuum editions of Deleuze and Guattari's works are differently
paginated to the previous Athlone and University of Minnesota
Press editions.

                     Works by Deleuze and Guattari

(AO) Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2004) [new edition]
Anti-Oedipus, translated by Robert Hurley, Mark Seem and Helen
R Lane, London and New York: Continuum.
   Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2002) [nouvelle edition augmentee]
   L'Anti-Oedipe: Capitalisme et Schizophrenic, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
(ATP) Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2004) [new edition] A
Thousand Plateaus, translated by Brian Massumi, London and New
York: Continuum.
   Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2001) Mille Plateaux: Capitalisme
   et Schizophrenic 2, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
(WiP?) Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1994) What is Philosophy?,
translated by Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell, New York:
Columbia University Press.
   Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1991) Quest-ce que la philosophic?,
   Paris: Editions de Minuit.
(K) Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1986) Kafka: Toward a Minor
Literature, translated by Dana Polan, Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
   Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F (2005) Kafka: Pour une Litterature
   Mineure, Paris: Editions de Minuit.

                                    X

                           ABBREVIATIONS

                          Works by Deleuze

(TRM) Deleuze, G. (2006) Two Regimes of Madness: Texts and
Interviews 1975-1995, edited by David Lapoujade, New York:
Semiotext(e).
   Deleuze, G. (2003) Deux Regimes de Fous: Textes et Entretiens
   1975-1995, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
(Cl) Deleuze, G. (2005) Cinema 1: The Movement-Image, translated by Hugh Tomlinson and Robert Galeta, London: Continuum.
   Deleuze, G. (1983) Cinema 1: Limage-mouvement, Paris: Editions
   de Minuit.
(C2) Deleuze, G. (2005) Cinema 2: The Time-Image, translated by
Hugh Tomlinson and Robert Galeta, London: Contiuum.
   Deleuze, G. (1985) Cinema 2: L'image-temps, Paris: Editions de
   Minuit.
(DI) Deleuze, G. (2004) Desert Islands and Other Texts 1953-1974,
edited by David Lapoujade, New York: Semiotext(e).
   Deleuze, G. (2002) L'ile Deserte et Autres Textes: Textes et
   Entretiens 1953-1974, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
(PS) Deleuze, G. (2000) Proust and Signs: The Complete Text,
translated by R. Howard, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
(CC) Deleuze, G. (1997) Essays Critical and Clinical, translated by
Daniel W. Smith and Michael A. Greco, Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
(N) Deleuze, G. (1995) Negotiations, translated by Martin
Joughin, New York: Columbia University Press.
   Deleuze, G. (2003) Pourparlers 1972-1990, Paris: Editions de
   Minuit.
(DR) Deleuze, G. (1994) Difference and Repetition, translated by
Paul Patton, London: Athlone.
   Deleuze, G. (2005) Difference et repetition, Paris: Presses
   Universitaires de France.
(ES) Deleuze, G. (1991) Empiricism and Subjectivity: An Essay on
Humes Theory of Human Nature, translated by Constantin
Boundas, New York: Columbia University Press.
   Deleuze, G. (1998) [sixth edition] Empirisme et Subjectivite: Essai
   sur la Nature Humaine selon Hume, Paris: Presses Universitaires
   de France.
(D) Deleuze, G. and Parnet, C. (1987) [new edition] Dialogues II,

                                  xi

                DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4A/77-OED/PUS

translated by Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam, London:
Continuum.
   Deleuze, G. and Parnet, C. (1996) Dialogues, Paris: Flammarion.
(NP) Deleuze, G. (1983) Nietzche and Philosophy, translated by
Hugh Tomlinson, London: Athlone.
   Deleuze, G. (2003) [fourth edition] Nietzsche et la philosophie,
   Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

                         Works by Guattari

(AOP) Guattari, F. (2006) The Anti-Oedipus Papers, edited by
Stephane Nadaud, translated by Kelina Gotman, New York:
Semiotext(e).
  Guattari, F. (2004) Ecritspour L'Anti-Oedipe, edited by Stephane
  Nadaud, Paris: Lignes-Manifeste.
(CY) Guattari, F. (1995) Chaosophy, edited by Sylvere Lotringer,
New York: Semiotext(e).

                                 xii

                               CHAPTER 1

       DELEUZE AND GU ATTAR I IN CONTEXT

  We were only two, but what was important for us was less our working
  together than this strange fact of working between the two of us. We
  stopped being 'author'.
                            Gilles Deleuze and Claire Parnet, Dialogues

  Naively I thought 'together' must mean 'with my friends, the gang'.
  But that didn't last long! I quickly understood that it would only be the
  two of us. It was a frenzy of work that I hadn't imagined possible until
  then.
                                                Felix Guattari, Chaosophy

In the always exacting judgement of Perry Anderson, Louis
Athusser's near hegemonic sway over Western Marxism and indeed
critical theory in general throughout the 1960s declined absolutely
in the aftermath of May '68 because his thought did not provide a
coherent response to what happened that summer.1 Even if he did
not approve of the turn their work took, Anderson would probably
agree to the related proposition that Deleuze and Guattari burst into
the limelight in the same period precisely because their work did
provide a coherent response to the Events of May. This does not
mean, however, that we need accept Anderson's description of what
he calls 'the moment of Anti-Oedipus' as the irruption of 'saturnalian subjectivism'.2 The resulting work is both more complex and
dare I say less irrational than Anderson allows. That being said,
Anderson's verdict on the state of Western Marxism as a whole in
this period does apply to Deleuze and Guattari's work and may serve
here to put their project into perspective in a very immediate fashion.
Anderson's greatest disappointment - if that is the right word, and

                                      1

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S Xl/Vr/-O£D/PUS

I'm not sure it is - concerning the development of theory in the
1960s and 1970s was its failure in the area he referred to as 'strategy',
'that is, any elaboration of a concrete or plausible perspective for a
transition beyond capitalist democracy to a socialist democracy'.3
What has to be remembered here, however, is that although this
indictment is framed in such a way that it seems to take aim at individual theorists, and clearly Anderson wants to call theorists like
Deleuze and Guattari to account, it actually applies to the situation
itself. As Fredric Jameson put it, refuting criticisms of Theodor
Adorno's alleged break with Marxism: 'It is not, indeed, people who
change, but rather situations.'4
   The perceived failure of the Events of May (a viewpoint Deleuze
and Guattari did not subscribe to) led to a situation for which Alain
Badiou has supplied the apt concept of Thermidorean' to describe:
it was a moment in which strategic thinking was rendered unthinkable.5 Thus the challenge of Western Marxism in the aftermath of
May '68 was not to supply the strategy to go with the theory, as
Anderson demands, but to use theory to cleanse strategy of its fatal
taint of impracticality. This is the challenge Anti-Oedipus answers
and it does so by providing a genealogy of desire, showing how and
when it came to be enchained. It is true that in the closing pages of
Anti-Oedipus Deleuze and Guattari quite explicitly state that their
work does not offer a model to follow; but then again, their thesis in
a nutshell is that if we understand desire properly and distinguish it
effectively from interest then the revolution is already made. This
revolution is, however, in constant danger of being permanently
postponed: witness Nicholas Sarkozy's ominous proclamation in the
lead up to the 2007 French presidential election: 'We have two days
to liquidate the legacy of May 1968!'6

                       WHEN GILLES MET FELIX

Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari met in the summer of 1969. Deleuze
says of their meeting that Guattari was the one who sought him out,
that at the time he didn't even know who he was. Evidently their
meeting went well because Deleuze suggested they work together.7 A
lot of ink has been spilled speculating about how their collaboration
worked in practice, all too often with the nefarious motive of sorting
out who wrote what. It seems to me, however, that Deleuze says it all
when he says that they each thought that the other had gone further

                                    2

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI IN CONTEXT

than they had and therefore they could learn from each other. In
conversation with Claire Parnet, Deleuze described his way of
working with Guattari as a 'pick-up' method, but then qualifies it by
saying 'method' is not the right word and suggests 'double-theft' and
'a-parallel evolution' as perhaps better alternatives (D, 18/25).

  It started off with letters. And then we began to meet from time
  to time to listen to what the other had to say. It was great fun. But
  it could be really tedious too. One of us always talked too much.
  Often one of us would put forward some notion, and the other
  just didn't see it, wouldn't be able to make anything of it until
  months later, in a different context. [. . .] And then we wrote a lot.
  Felix sees writing as a schizoid flow drawing in all sorts of things.
  I'm interested in the way a page of writing flies off in all directions
  and at the same time closes right up on itself like an egg. And in
  the reticences, the resonances, the lurches, and all the larvae you
  can find in a book. Then we really started writing together, it
  wasn't a problem. We took turns at rewriting things. (N, 14/25)

In 1969 Gilles Deleuze was 44 and having just completed his
Doctorat D'Etat he was the very epitome of a respectable professor.
This was indeed how even his friends regarded him. 'Deleuze was a
delightful character,' Antonio Negri would say later, 'but he was a
professor, an intellectual!'8 Similarly, Guattari informs us that he
had hoped his collaboration with Deleuze would mean that Deleuze
would get out more and get more involved in political action, yet it
seemed to have the opposite effect (CY, 28).9 This should not be
taken to mean that Deleuze was inactive or uninvolved politically.10
It simply acknowledges that his preference was to conduct politics
through his writing by promulgating new forms of thought via the
invention of new concepts. Deleuze more or less affirms this himself
when he declares that one shouldn't travel around too much because
it interferes with one's becoming (N, 138/188). Yet in spite of his
aloofness, this extremely scholarly professor clearly exerted a powerful intellectual magnetism in his seminars and in his books.
   Viewers of L'Abecedaire de Gilles Deleuze, a remarkable eighthour dialogue (Deleuze explicitly refused to do an interview) between
Deleuze and Claire Parnet recorded for French television in 1988, but
only screened after his death, can see this clearly.11 Prefacing the
interview there is a tantalizingly brief glimpse, in grainy, poorly

                                   3

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

lit black and white footage, of one of Deleuze's seminars at the
University of Vincennes in 1980, which shows a relatively small room
filled to capacity with evidently spellbound students.12 The plain,
functional table at which Deleuze is seated is covered with an array
of tape recorders and microphones, the desiring-machines of a new
generation of students. Richard Pinhas, experimental musician and
dedicated Deleuzian, was one of those new kinds of students with a
tape recorder. He made recordings of dozens of Deleuze's seminars,
which he has now made available on the web at webdeleuze.com. In
the process he has inaugurated an incredible, spontaneous collective
archival project aimed at making Deleuze's teaching as accessible as
possible: the recordings have been transcribed and translated into
several languages, thus providing Deleuze scholars with an invaluable resource.13
   Intellectually Deleuze defined himself against the generation that
came before him - he respected and admired his teachers, but
nonetheless rejected their teaching very firmly. 'I could not stand
Descartes, the dualisms and the Cogito, or Hegel, the triad and
the operation of the negation.' (D, 14/21). The one exception was
Sartre.14 In his early student days, he saw Sartre as a breath of fresh
air, but did not feel drawn to existentialism or phenomenology
(D, 12/18). Novelist Michel Tournier recalled that even then as an
undergraduate Deleuze was already a powerful innovator:

   We soon came to fear his talent for seizing upon a single one of
   our words and using it to expose our banality, stupidity, or failure
   of intelligence. He possessed extraordinary powers of translation
   and rearrangement: all the tired philosophy of the curriculum
   passed through him and emerged unrecognisable but rejuvenated,
   with a fresh, undigested, bitter taste of newness that we weaker,
   lazier minds found disconcerting and repulsive.15

In his own description of his student days, Deleuze said he belonged
to a generation, 'that was more or less bludgeoned to death with the
history of philosophy' (N, 5/14). What Deleuze objected to was the
repressive way this history of philosophy was used to wrap thought
in the straightjacket of the imperative injunction 'you can't do this
until you've read that', which all students are familiar with.
   Deleuze's way of escaping this was to think of 'the history of
philosophy as a sort of buggery or (it comes to the same thing)

                                   4

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI IN CONTEXT

immaculate conception. I saw myself as taking an author from
behind and giving him a child that would be his own offspring,
yet monstrous.' (N, 6/15). His monographs on Hume, Bergson,
Nietzsche and Spinoza, written in the early part of his career, do not
put words into the mouths of their subjects, but are nonetheless
able to make them say something quite different to the received view
of them. But more importantly, these books enabled Deleuze to
think differently; they were his lines of flight, or 'witch's brooms'
(D, 15/22), that took him outside and beyond the confines of his situation, giving him the freedom to do philosophy for himself. By his
own estimation, he did not really begin to do philosophy for himself
until he wrote Difference and Repetition, the major thesis for his
Doctorat D'Etat. It was this book, according to Deleuze, particularly chapter 3 The Image of Thought', which concerns precisely the
conditions of possibility for producing radically new thought, that
paved the way to his collaborative work with Guattari (D, xvii).
   A few years younger than Deleuze, Felix Guattari was only 37
in 1969. At this point in his career he had neither a degree nor a
book to his name. Again, Negri provides a vivid portrait highlighting the contrasting personalities of the two future collaborators.
Speaking of Deleuze, Negri says: 'We talked about many things, but
I couldn't tell him that I was depressed, that I was tired, that I had
problems. I couldn't ask him to do anything for me. It was difficult
to explain to him what was happening in Italy. With Felix I could.
Very soon we began to come up with ideas together - and not only
from the theoretical point of view.'16 Guattari had a gift for organizing people, for bringing them together and engineering a creative
spark between them. It was almost as if he was the living embodiment of 'transversality', the concept he invented to describe relations between subjects and objects, or subjects and subjects, which
is neither unifying nor totalizing. Before he met Deleuze, Guattari
had already gained notoriety in France as a political activist.
He was known in the French press as 'Mr Anti-' for his public campaigning on a range of causes from the decolonization of Algeria,
the improved treatment of prisoners in French prisons (he was a
member of Michel Foucault's Groupe d'Information sur les
Prisons), the improved treatment of the mentally ill in French insane
asylums, the establishment of free radio, to Gay rights and Green
politics. In 1973 he outraged national sensibilities by publishing a
special issue of the journal Recherches edited by Guy Hocquenghem

                                  5

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4/V7Y-OED/PUS

and Rene Scherer provocatively entitled Three Billion Perverts: An
Encyclopaedia of Homosexualities'.17 French courts banned it and
ordered all copies destroyed. Guattari was also fined, but he proudly
never paid. More controversially, he collaborated with Negri, who
was arrested in 1977 on charges of terrorism for his association with
the Red Brigades. Guattari also spoke against the extradition from
Germany to France of Klaus Croissant, a German lawyer sympathetic to the Baader-Meinhof Group; and in the late 1950s and early
1960s he carried cash for the Front de liberation nationale algerien
[Algerian National Liberation Front], the guerrilla army fighting for
independence from French rule in Algeria.
   Guattari's activism was informed by his clinical practice as a psychotherapist in the private psychiatric clinic La Borde founded in
1953 by Jean Oury, with the aim of providing a radically new form
of care which 'de-institutionalized the institution'.18 At La Borde all
staff, including cooks and cleaners, participated in providing
therapy for the patients, many of whom were psychotic, and all staff,
including doctors and nurses, participated in the maintenance of the
hospital. 'What we're trying to do', Guattari explained in a note to
Deleuze, is 'upset the caste imaginary that marks these patients,
nurses and doctors (not to mention all the numerous subcastes!)'
(AOP, 144/204). Guattari was enlisted by Oury because of his ability
to organize collective action and thus help break down the barriers
between staff and patients. Guattari received formal training in psychoanalysis from France's most important interpreter of Freud,
Jacques Lacan, achieving the status of analyste membre in 1969.
Although he remained a member of Lacan's school, the Ecole freudienne de Paris, until its dissolution in 1980 shortly before the
master's death, Guattari's relationship to Lacan and Lacanian psychoanalysis was at best ambivalent.
   The publication of Guattari's notebooks, The Anti-Oedipus Papers,
has made it clear just how strained relations were between them, especially after the publication of Anti-Oedipus (even though that work
was in the words of its authors designed to save Lacan from the
Lacanians). Indeed, even before it was published Lacan was distressed
by its possible contents and according to Guattari's journal put pressure on him to give him a copy of the manuscript. Guattari had to
refuse because Deleuze, whose relation with Lacan wasn't as personal,
only wanted to show Lacan the text when it was finished.19 Deleuze
and Lacan clearly regarded each other as rivals, as is evident in the

                                  6

                   DELEUZE AND GU ATTAR I IN CONTEXT

fact that they deliberately scheduled their seminars at the same time,
compelling students to choose between them. That Deleuze saw
himself as the clear winner in their struggles can be seen in his tart
remark that in writing Anti-Oedipus they'd tried to give Lacan some
'schizophrenic help'. By which he means eliminating Lacan's signature conceptual innovations, his notions of structure, the symbolic
order, the signifier, and so on, which in Deleuze's unequivocal phrase
are 'thoroughly misguided' (N, 14/25).
   The collaboration between Deleuze and Guattari is often described
as a meeting of opposites, the love story between a wasp and an orchid
as one writer has put it.20 But despite superficialities, this is clearly
false inasmuch as it implies the one completes or complements the
other. Moreover this myth, for that is clearly what it is, has had a
rather pernicious effect. Guattari is variously treated as the junior
partner and his contribution either downplayed or ignored altogether
(and almost all commentators on Deleuze, myself included, have been
guilty at one time or another of writing 'Deleuze' when really they
meant 'Deleuze and Guattari'), or worse, the corruptor of Deleuze,
and condemned to take the fall for all that is strange, disturbing or
simply incomprehensible in their writings. I can but agree with Gary
Genosko that something must be done to address the confiscation of
Guattari's contribution, though I confess I'm at a loss as to what that
might be.21

                                MAY '68

It is often said, on the authority of the authors' own words, that
Anti-Oedipus is a May '68 book. But what does that mean? As
Kristin Ross argues in her history of the events of May and its influence on French intellectual life, May '68 and its Afterlives, the
meaning of May '68, one of the largest mass movements in history,
was never straightforward or obvious, even to its participants, who
were in any case very far from being uniform in their backgrounds,
opinions, politics and motives.22 Neither Deleuze nor Guattari are
included in Ross's pantheon of thinkers, activists and writers whose
'intellectual and political trajectories' can be traced back to May
'68.23 At first glance, this might seem an injustice because after all it
is not as though Deleuze and Guattari did not involve themselves in
the events of May, particularly Guattari who took part in the infamous occupation of the Theatre de 1'Odeon. However, there is more

                                    7

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

than a grain of truth in Ross's verdict. By their own admission,
Deleuze and Guattari were blindsided by May '68; it took them both
by surprise and left them floundering for a response.24 But, having
said that, I see no reason to go along with Ross in thinking that
Deleuze and Guattari's concepts of desire and becoming cannot be
used to account for what happened that May.25
   The difficulty Deleuze and Guattari had in forming a response to
the events of May can be seen in the very texture of the work they
produced together, especially its frequently bemoaned complexity.
They were as troubled by the actualities of May '68 as they were
excited by its possibilities and this ambivalence clearly shapes their
theory of desire which tries to account for the contradictory currents
of political thought and action that events like May '68 bring into
stark relief.26 Deleuze and Guattari were stirred by the possibility for
change May '68 seemed to betoken, namely the liberation of desire
itself, but they were also highly sceptical of the doctrinal turn that
accompanied it, which seemed to them to promise the incarceration
of desire all over again. They were particularly opposed to the Left
Bank Maoism that blossomed that spring like the proverbial
hundred flowers. They rejected the idea that May '68 constituted a
first or preliminary stage in a longer struggle that would culminate
in the installation of a new state apparatus.27 'It would be strange',
Guattari remarked, 'to rely on a party or state apparatus for the
liberation of desire.' (CY, 62).
   If it is legitimate to say Anti-Oedipus is a May '68 book however,
then it is because it was in a spirit of mutual ambivalence and uncertainty about May '68 that the two thinkers first came together in
1969. '[I]t was as less a question of pooling knowledge than the accumulation of our uncertainties and, even a certain distress in the face
of the turn of events after May '68.' (CY, 93). In other words, it is
legitimate to say Anti-Oedipus is a May '68 book providing it is
understood that Deleuze and Guattari were not 'soixante-huitards'
or May 68ers and that their view of those events was quite different
from the students and workers who put up barricades in the streets
and tore up paving stones in search of the beach underneath. Their
reticence regarding May '68 can partially be explained in generational terms inasmuch that Deleuze and Guattari saw themselves as
belonging to the generation prior to the actual 68ers (if by that one
means the students at the Sorbonne who provided the initial spark
of protest that set the politically seismic events in motion). Their

                                   8

                  DELEUZE AND GU ATTAR I IN CONTEXT

intellectual and political formation took shape during World War II
and its aftermath and wears the scars of the defeat, occupation and
liberation of France in its scepticism towards all forms of organized
politics. As Guattari explained in an interview following the publication of Anti-Oedipus in France in 1972: 'We are part of a generation
whose political consciousness was born in the enthusiasm and
naivety of the Liberation, with its conspirational mythology of
fascism.' He further qualified this remark by adding that the 'questions left hanging by the other failed revolution that was May '68
were developed for us based on a counterpoint that was all the more
troubling because, like many others, we were worried about the future
being readied for us, one that could make you miss the fascism of
yore'. (CY, 94). In other words, Deleuze and Guattari were distrustful of the immodest and frequently hubristic claims that were made
about what May '68 really meant, i.e., that it had somehow changed
everything, but not opposed to it in principle as many of their generation in fact were.28 Ten years later, in A Thousand Plateaus, they
would lash out at the May '68 naysayers like Raymond Aron as
follows:

   [T]hose who evaluated things in macropolitical terms understood
   nothing of the event because something unaccountable was
   escaping. The politicians, the parties, the unions, many leftists,
   were utterly vexed; they kept repeating over and again that 'con-
   ditions' were not ripe. It was as though they had been temporar-
   ily deprived of the entire dualism machine that made them valid
   spokespeople. (ATP, 238/264)

As is obvious from the stridently anti-capitalist tone of AntiOedipus, Deleuze and Guattari were highly sympathetic to the
Utopian (i.e., world-transformative) dimension of the May '68 struggles, but they weren't ready to accept that the solution was an immediate transition to communism.

   Liberated desire means desire that escapes the impasse of private
   fantasy: it is not a question of adapting it, socialising it, disci-
   plining it, but of plugging it in in such a way that its process not
   be interrupted in the social body, and that its expression be
   collective. What counts is not the authoritarian unification, but
   rather a sort of infinite spreading: desire in the schools, the

                                   9

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   factories, the neighbourhoods, the nursery schools, the prisons,
   etc. It is not a question of directing, of totalising, but of plugging
   into the same plan of oscillation. As long as one alternates
   between the impotent spontaneity of anarchy and the bureau-
   cratic and hieratic coding of a party organisation, there is no lib-
   eration of desire. (CY, 62)

There can be no denying that Anti-Oedipus is conceived as a revolutionary book, i.e., a book that wants to open our eyes to the potential for revolution in the realm of everyday life. But as the passage
just cited makes clear, its definition of revolution doesn't include
taking power.29 It doesn't mean overturning one regime and then
installing another regime and reforming government from top to
bottom as the Maoists and Leninists demand. It wants no part of
such programmes.
   Revolution for Deleuze and Guattari means schizophrenizing the
existing power structure, making it vibrate to a new rhythm, making
it change from within, without at the same time becoming a schizophrenic. But they don't offer a model for a new society, save that it
won't replicate the old repressions. Their argument is that we'll never
get to that new society the militants of every persuasion claim their
doctrine is leading us towards if we don't first of all shed our old
habits, our old love of power, our manifold addictions to the exercise of force, our customary obsequiousness in the face of power,
and so on. 'Schizoanalysis as such does not raise the problem of the
nature of the socius to come out of the revolution; it does not claim
to be identical with the revolution itself (AO, 415/456). Its only
question is, 'Where will the revolution come from?' From start to
finish, Anti-Oedipus is dominated by this single question:

   Will it come in the person of a Castro, an Arab, a Black Panther,
   or a Chinaman on the horizon? A May '68, a home-grown Maoist
   planted like an anchorite on a factory smoke-stack? Always the
   addition of an axiom to seal off a breach that has been discov-
   ered; fascist colonels start reading Mao, we won't be fooled again;
   Castro has become impossible, even in relation to himself; vacu-
   oles are isolated, ghettos created; unions are appealed to for help;
   the most sinister forms of 'dissuasion' are invented; the repression
   of interest is reinforced - but where will the new irruption of
   desire come from? (AO, 413/454)

                                   10

                   DELEUZE AND GU ATTAR I IN CONTEXT

Deleuze and Guattari's answer to this question, which we'll examine
in more detail in the chapters to follow, is that the new irruption of
desire must always come from within desire itself. Desire is revolutionary in itself, Deleuze and Guattari argue, but it is constantly
being shackled to, or worse converted into interest, and as interest it
is susceptible to capture, domestication and pacification. Their
conviction, reiterated throughout Anti-Oedipus, is that 'capitalist
society can endure many manifestations of interest, but not one
manifestation of desire, which would be enough to make its fundamental structures explode, even at the kindergarten level.' (AO,
414/455). But pure manifestations of desire are rare, even in actual
revolutionary situations.

   One cannot account for a revolutionary situation by a simple
   analysis of the interests of the time. In 1903 the Russian Social
   Democratic Party debated the alliances and organisation of the
   proletariat, and the role of the avant-garde. While pretending to
   prepare for the revolution, it was suddenly shaken up by the
   events of 1905 and had to jump on board a moving train. There
   was a crystallisation of desire on a wide social scale created by a
   yet incomprehensible situation. Same thing in 1917. (CY, 65)

By the same token, there are always groups in place to capitalize on
the disruption to the social order revolution causes.

   Daniel Guerin has said some profound things about the revolu-
   tion of 1789. The bourgeoisie never had any illusions about who
   its real enemy was. Its real enemy was not the previous system, but
   what escaped the previous system's control, and what the bour-
   geoisie strove to master in its turn. It too owed its power to the
   ruin of the old system, but this power could only be exercised
   insofar as it opposed everything else that in rebellion against
   the old system. The bourgeoisie has never been revolutionary. It
   simply made sure others pulled off the revolution for it. It
   manipulated, channelled, and repressed an enormous popular
   desire. (CY, 65)

The point not to be missed here is that one cannot use interest as a
way of determining where the revolution will come from, but one
must take interest into account when one considers the parallel

                                  11

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4/V7Y-O£D/P(/S

problem of 'Who will betray the revolution?' And for Deleuze and
Guattari, these two questions, 'Where will the revolution come
from?' and 'How will it be betrayed?' are ultimately different sides of
the same coin.

                     ALGERIA, VIETNAM, ITALY . . .

Apprehending Anti-Oedipus as a May '68 book is a useful way of
focusing the multiple and multivalent impulses that went into writing
it, but the limitations of this framing device are obvious.30 It risks
making it seem that Anti-Oedipus was a purely local affair, a singleshot response to a single-shot event that took place in Paris three
decades ago. It is true to say, as I will discuss in more detail in the next
chapter, that many of the debates Anti-Oedipus weighs into are
patently Parisian in nature. Indeed, it spars more or less overtly with
practically every leading light of the intellectual scene in Paris at that
time, particularly Louis Althusser, Jacques Lacan and Levi-Strauss.
But having said that, it is also true to say that the debates inspired by
the work of Althusser, Lacan and Levi-Strauss, not to mention the
theoretical upheavals provoked by Jean Baudrillard, Helene Cixous,
Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, Luce Irigaray, Julia Kristeva and
Jean-Frangois Lyotard, reverberated around the world, albeit in the
hermetic confines of university English and French departments.
Students from all over the world flocked to Paris in the late 1960s and
early 1970s to sit at the feet of these master thinkers who in their
unwillingness to accept at face value the received wisdom of the past,
in any of the disciplines, appeared to offer not only a new way of
thinking, but verily a whole new worldview. In the history of theoretical discourse, Anti-Oedipus appeared at the dawn of a decade
that was, as Fredric Jameson has put it, 'essentially French'.31
However, the fact that theory had become or was becoming global in
its distribution at this point does not prove that its production was
anything other than a purely local affair. For that reason it is worth
looking at May '68 itself and asking whether or not it was the purely
local affair it appears to be to the untutored eye. Anticipating the discussion to follow, I want to propose the following corollary to my
initial claim that it is legitimate to treat Anti-Oedipus as a May '68
book: It is legitimate to treat Anti-Oedipus as a May '68 book to the
extent that May '68 itself is treated as a complex, multiply determined event whose place in history is far from settled.

                                    12

                   DELEUZE AND GU ATTAR I IN CONTEXT

   Bernardo Bertolucci's highly stylized film about May '68, The
Dreamers (2003), is a vivid illustration of the narrow, exclusively
Parisian image of the events that has to be overturned if we are to
see things in their proper historical light. Bertolucci depicts May '68
as a student protest, which is how it began, but its significance to
history derives from the fact that it soon became a nationwide
protest involving more than 9 million striking workers. The effects of
the strikes are made apparent to us in the film in the form of mounds
of uncollected garbage mouldering in stairwells and on street
corners, but the striking workers themselves are never shown.
Moreover, Bertolucci makes it seem the student protests began in the
privileged cloisters of the Latin Quarter, and not, as was actually the
case, in the functionalist towers of the new universities in the outlying immigrant slum areas of Nanterre and Vincennes, where students were provided 'with a direct "lived" lesson in uneven
development'.32 According to the great Marxist philosopher Henri
Lefebvre, it was this daily 'experience' of the callousness of the state
that radicalized the students and provided the catalyst for their connection to workers' movements.33 Secondly, through the vehicle of
its twin brother and sister protagonists Isabelle (Eva Green) and
Theo (Louis Garrel), both in their late teens or early twenties and
still living at home with their relatively well-to-do parents, it depicts
the students who took part in May '68 as naive, self-absorbed
and perverted. Cocooned in their own fantasy world concocted from
fragments of movies and books, Isabelle and Theo are a postmodern
version of Ulrich and Agathe.34 They meet an American exchange
student, Matthew (Michael Pitt), and invite him join them. When
their parents go away, they are able to indulge their whims uninhibitedly and the scene is set for a cliched romp through the three staples
of 1960s counterculture, namely sex, drugs and rock'n'roll. They
take bubble baths together and get stoned on hash; Matthew and
Isabelle make love on the kitchen floor while Theo fries an egg and
looks on with Brechtian disinterest; they drink papa's fine wine
straight from the bottle and debate movies and politics long into the
night as though nothing else mattered. They ignore the world
outside.
   Matthew soon upsets their idyllic universe by accusing them both
of being unworldly: Isabelle because she's never been out on a real
'date' and Theo because of his starry-eyed romanticization of the
Chinese Red Guards. It all begins when Isabelle demands that he

                                   13

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S>Wr/-OED/P(7S

shave his pubic hair as a sign of love. He refuses because the demand
is in his view nothing but a silly game, an infantalizing gesture that
proves their disconnection from the reality of what is going on
around them. He tells them both 'there's something going on out
there, I can feel it', but neither Isabelle nor Theo seem to care. Their
political awakening comes soon enough though in the form of a
brick thrown through their apartment window. The brick literally
shatters their world, but also saves their lives too. Awakening after
another of their orgiastic episodes, Isabelle finds a cheque written by
her parents and realizes that they must have been in the apartment
and therefore witnessed their dishabille state and perhaps guessed at
their decadent behaviour - the three of them are naked, sleeping side
by side in a tent Isabelle erected in the living room. Mortally
ashamed, Isabelle decides to kill herself and Theo and Matthew as
well, so she switches on the gas and lays down between the two boys
and readies herself for death. It is at this point that the window is
broken. The intrusion of the street into their self-enclosed fantasy
world is thus presented as a life-saving event. The brick breaks the
spell of self-indulgence they've all been under and suddenly both
Isabelle and Theo realize something is going on outside and that it
does concern them, does interest them, and is more important than
their fantasy world. The three of them rush first to the balcony to
witness the events below and then to the street to join in. But here
the happy trio split up because only Isabelle and Theo are willing to
take part. Matthew, a self-proclaimed pacifist, turns his back on
them. Having urged them both to take note of what is going on
outside, Matthew recoils in horror when he sees Theo with a
Molotov cocktail in his hands and refuses to join them when they
rush hand in hand towards the fray. Bertolucci's last act then is to
make May '68 an exclusively French affair, but also wrongheaded
and needlessly violent.
   Kristin Ross's account of May '68 takes us in precisely the opposite direction to Bertolucci. She is anxious that we see that May '68
was not just a student protest, and that those involved were anything
but naive (in the sense of being unaware of history), and perhaps
most importantly that it was part of a longer chain of events that
stretched far beyond Paris. To begin with, Ross argues for an
enlargement of the timeframe in which the events are considered,
not just beyond the month of May itself, which as she shows (and
Bertolucci's film exemplifies) restricts the events to a limited series of

                                    14

                   DELEUZE AND GU ATTAR I IN CONTEXT

goings-on in the Sorbonne, but back two decades to the start of the
Algerian War. This, in turn, enables her to argue that May '68 'was
not a great cultural reform, a push toward modernisation, or the
dawning sun of a new individualism. It was above all not a revolt on
the part of the sociological category "youth".'35 It was rather the
revolt of a broad cross-section of workers and students of all ages
who had grown up with and witnessed the sickening brutality of the
Gaullist regime's failed attempt to deny Algeria its independence.
Algeria defined a fracture in French society, in its identity, by creating a break between the official "humanist" discourse of that society
and French practices occurring in Algeria and occasionally within
France as well.'36 It was impossible to reconcile the ideal of a benevolent welfare state espoused by France's leaders with the truncheonwielding reality of the hegemonic state, except perhaps in oedipal
terms by casting President de Gaulle in the role of father and relegating the protestors to the rank of children. Anti-Oedipus is of
course directed against this pseudo-psychoanalytic account of the
events and indeed Deleuze and Guattari argue that it was precisely
the example of Algeria that makes it clear that politics cannot be
reduced to an oedipal struggle. 'It is strange', they write, 'that we had
to wait for the dreams of the colonised peoples in order to see that,
on the vertices of the pseudo triangle, mommy was dancing with the
missionary, daddy was being fucked by the tax collector, while the
self was being beaten by the white man.' (AO, 105-6/114).
   What Fanon's work showed us, Deleuze and Guattari go on to
suggest, is that every subject is directly coupled to elements of their

   historical situation - the soldier, the cop, the occupier, the collab-
   orator, the radical, the resister, the boss, the boss's wife - who con-
   stantly break all triangulations, and who prevent the entire
   situation from falling back on the familial complex and becom-
   ing internalised in it. (AO, 107/116)

As Belden Fields writes, the Algerian War was a crucial stimulus for
the radicalization of French students in the 1960s because it delegitimized the structures of the state. The educational system, for
instance, came to be viewed as a conduit funnelling young people
into military bureaucracies to fight imperialist wars, or into capitalist bureaucracies, whether public or private, to earn a living as a
supporting cog in a system of repressive privilege.'37 Jean-Paul

                                   15

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

Belmondo, 'the doomed anti-hero' of Jean-Luc Goddard's pathbreaking film of 1960, A bout de souffle [Breathless], is usually taken
as the 'screen representative of that young generation of Frenchmen
condemned to serve, suffer, and even die in Algeria'.38 This perceived
lack of control over their own destiny, even among the relatively privileged classes to which the majority of students actually belonged,
coupled with the oppressive archaism of the educational system itself,
and indeed the state structure as a whole, generated among radicalized youth a powerful sense of empathy with all victims of the state.
The students saw themselves as being in solidarity with factory
workers, despite the fact that their destiny was to be the managers
who would one day have to 'manage' these selfsame workers. In other
words, in spite of the fact that their class interests were different, the
students and the workers were nonetheless able to find a point of
common interest in their dispute with the state. The usual divide and
conquer tactics the state relies on to stratify the population and ensure
that precisely this type of connection between strata doesn't occur
failed spectacularly. It failed because the state was unable, at least in
the first instance, to present itself as something other than a huge,
oppressive monolithic edifice determined to stamp out dissent with an
iron fist. Unfortunately, the French Communist Party, still a very
strong and widely supported institution, was tarnished by its 'pragmatic' response to the war - the party line, that the war should be
ended by negotiated settlement, was strictly enforced, with the result
that it too came to be seen as ossified and antiquated and of little relevance to the needs of the present generation.39 Deleuze and Guattari
clearly shared this view; their frequent anti-reformist remarks should
be seen as directed at the French Communist Party.
   Ross's second move is to argue for an enlargement of the geographical framework in which the events are considered, not just
beyond the Latin Quarter to the outer suburbs of Paris, but beyond
France altogether to still another of its former colonies, namely
Vietnam, which having rid itself of its French masters in the 1950s
was then in the process of expelling the American pretenders.

   In its battle with the United States, with the worldwide political
   and cultural domination the United States had exerted since the
   end of World War II, Vietnam made possible a merging of the
   themes of anti-imperialism and anti-capitalism; the theoretical
   justification was loosely supplied by Maosim.40

                                    16

                  DELEUZE AND GU ATTAR I IN CONTEXT

In fact, the events themselves were sparked by an incident - a
window of the American Express building on rue Scribe in Paris was
broken - that occurred as part of a student protest against the war
in Vietnam on 20 March 1968. The irruption of student protest
at Nanterre two days later was in part provoked by the heavyhandedness of the police response to the anti-Vietnam march. The
students at Nanterre rallied themselves under the banner of
'Mouvement du 22 mars', deliberately recalling Castro's 'July 26th
Movement' commemorating the attack on Moncada fortress and
the start of the insurrection against Batista. 'Vietnam thus both
launched the action in the streets as well as brought under one
umbrella a number of groups - the CVN [Comite Viet-nam
national] was dominated by Trotskyists, the CVB [Comite Viet-nam
de base] by Maoists - as well as previously unaffiliated militants
working together.'41 For the protesters, students and workers alike,
Vietnam made manifest processes that were thought to be merely
latent in the West. For one thing, it revealed both the inherent violence of the postmodern capitalist state and the lengths to which it
is prepared to go in order to preserve its power. It demonstrated a
willingness on the part of the powerful to use violence against the
powerless to defend the status quo.42 Vietnam also revealed the vulnerability of the super state and its susceptibility to a 'revolution
from below' (DI, 213/297). Sartre, for one, was convinced that the
true of origin of May '68 was Vietnam because the example of
Vietnamese guerrillas winning a war against a vastly superior force,
albeit at the cost of an enormous loss of life, extended the domain
of the possible for Western intellectuals who otherwise thought of
themselves as powerless in the face of the state.43
   More concretely, French workers whose livelihoods were threatened by a process we know today as globalization, the process
whereby local markets are forcibly opened to global competitors, saw
themselves as victims of American imperialism too. Deleuze and
Guattari were keenly aware of the high cost the structural adjustments (to use the purposefully dry language of economists):

   If we look at today's [1972] situation, power necessarily has a
   global or total vision. What I mean is that every form of repres-
   sion today [repression actuelles], and they are multiple, is easily
   totalised, systematised from the point of view of power: the racist
   repression against immigrants, the repression in factories, the

                                  17

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S4A/7Y-O£D/PUS

  repression in schools and teaching, and the repression of youth
  in general. We mustn't look for the unity of these forms of repres-
  sion only in reaction to May '68, but more so in a concerted pre-
  paration and organisation concerning our immediate future.
  Capitalism in France is dropping its liberal, paternalistic mask of
  full employment; it desperately needs a 'reserve' of unemployed
  workers. It's from this vantage point that unity can be found in
  the forms of repression I already mentioned: the limitation of
  immigration, once it's understood we're leaving the hardest and
  lowest paying jobs to them; the repression in factories, because
  now it's all about once again giving the French a taste for hard
  work; the struggle against youth and the repression in schools and
  teaching, because police repression must be all the more active
  now that there is less need for young people on the job market.
  (DI, 210/294)

On this point, Ross argues that the geographical boundary of the
events of May needs to be widened to encompass Italy because
the political convulsions wrought by the first stages of globalization
were nowhere in Europe felt more keenly.44 The striking Fiat workers'
slogan 'Vietnam is in our factories!' made the connection to
American imperialism explicit. This is, then, Ross's third move: she
argues for a redefinition of the sociological frame in which the events
are considered. May '68 would not have been the event it was if the
protest action had been confined to either the students or the workers
or even the farmers. It was the fact that these groups, as well as many
others, found it possible and necessary to link up with each other that
resulted in the extraordinary event we know as May '68. But, and this
is Ross's main point, none of these groups - students, workers,
farmers, etc. - can be treated as pre-existing, self-contained, homogeneous entities. As for the encounters between these heterogeneous
groups, they obviously cannot be treated in the same way that one
might regard the actions of states agreeing by treaty to work together
for the sake of a common interest. Ross suggests that the process
might better be described as 'cultural contamination' and argues that
it 'was encounters with people different from themselves - and not
the glow of shared identity - that allowed a dream of change to flourish'.45 Ross's purpose, however, is not to assert the primacy of the
individual, or indeed the primacy of difference, two moves which
as Jameson has shown in his various critiques of Anglo-American

                                  18

                   DELEUZE AND GU ATTAR I IN CONTEXT

cultural studies lead inexorably to political paralysis. By repudiating
both the collective and the same under the utterly misconceived
banner of 'anti-totalization', cultural studies has for all practical
intents and purposes divested itself of two of the most basic prerequisites for politics, namely the potential for a common action and
the identification of a common aim.46 Well aware of the pitfalls of
valorizing the individual at the expense of the collective, the different
at the expense of the same, Ross argues for an approach to the sociological dimension of May '68 that is perfectly attuned to Deleuze
and Guattari's work.47
   Ultimately for Deleuze and Guattari, accounting for May '68
necessitated a complete rethinking of political concepts like power,
power relations, groups, group identity, the event, and so on, and
insofar as it takes up this challenge, Anti-Oedipus is appropriately
described as a May '68 book.

                                   19

                              CHAPTER 2

                   OVERVIEW OF THEMES

  Everything begins with Marx, continues on with Lenin, and ends with
  the refrain, 'Welcome, Mr Brezhnev'.
                       Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus

  The schizo is not revolutionary, but the schizophrenic process - in
  terms of which the schizo is merely the interruption, or the continua-
  tion in the void - is the potential for revolution.
                          Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus

In the long aftermath of May '68, an event which many French intellectuals came to think of as a 'failed revolt', the question of power -
what it is, how it functions, who has it and who does not - was the
principal concern of the majority of France's leading intellectuals.
Along with the interrelated questions concerning the possibility of
resistance and (more concretely) the possibility of political action
itself, power was the uppermost concern of Louis Althusser, Alain
Badiou, Etienne Balibar, Jean Baudrillard, Pierre Bourdieu, Cornelius
Castoriadis, Helene Cixous, Regis Debray, Jacques Derrida, Michel
Foucault, Luce Irigaray, Julia Kristeva, Henri Lefebvre, Jean-Francois
Lyotard, Nicos Poulantzas, Jacques Ranciere and Paul Virilio. Very
far from homogeneous in their political and philosophical allegiances,
though most would own to a Left-orientation, providing it was clear
that didn't mean they were Marxists (or, in the case of Althusser and
Althusserians like Balibar and Ranciere, they would own to a Leftorientation providing it was understood that meant they were a very
particular type of Marxist), there is a surprising degree of consistency
across the quite diverse body of work produced by these writers in the
decade after May '68 concerning the question of power.

                                    20

                          OVERVIEW OF THEMES

   There was, for instance, broad acceptance of the idea that power
is not a simple matter of coercion or repression, the dominance of
one group of people over another. It was generally agreed that contemporary society cannot be understood as the product or the
expression of a powerful ruling elite exercising influence over a
powerless majority. Moreover, there was broad agreement that
power resides in the ordinary, that tradition, law, language and the
way we organize our daily lives is directly and indirectly inflected by
the operations of power. Similarly, there was a general acceptance of
the proposition that power requires a degree of complicity on the
part of the ruled to function, but disagreement on the question of
how this was achieved. All theorists mentioned agree that the situation in which the planet finds itself today is parlous, to say the least,
and they more or less agree on the cause, namely capitalism; what's
more, they all agree things are in desperate need of change, but they
disagree - often quite vehemently - as to how this change might be
achieved. The debate that raged in respect to this last question concerned power directly inasmuch that the central point of contention
was whether or not change could be achieved without forcibly taking
power through some kind of revolutionary action.
   Anti-Oedipus was lobbed into this fray like an intellectual cluster
bomb - it had multiple targets, from the primacy of the signifier in linguistics to the dependency on lack in psychoanalysis, but its primary
objective was (as Michel Foucault astutely points out in his highly
influential preface to the English translation) to caution us against the
fascist inside, the desire to seize power for oneself. The principal thesis
of Anti-Oedipus, around which its many conceptual inventions turn,
is that revolution is not primarily or even necessarily a matter of
taking power. Insofar as taking power means preserving all the old
institutions and ideas in which power is invested it could even be said
that revolutions of this type are actually counter-revolutionary in
purpose and intent because they change nothing essential. By the
same token, Deleuze and Guattari were concerned about the allure of
power, its apparent ability to drive us to desire to be placed under its
yoke. The most important political question, as far as Deleuze and
Guattari are concerned, is how it is possible for desire to act against
its interest. In Forget Foucault, the late Jean Baudrillard's waspish
polemic against everything that was thought 'fashionable' in theory in
France in the 1970s, states that in Deleuze and Guattari's work
'desire's reversion into its own repression is inexplicable'.1 His point is

                                    21

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S4A/T/-OED/PUS

that if desire is such a powerful, liberatory force, then how is it possible that it ever came to be repressed in the first place. This is emblematic of a great many of the negative responses to Deleuze and
Guattari's work. It betrays a significant misunderstanding of their
project as a whole and of their concept of desire in particular.
   Shortly before the appearance of Anti-Oedipus, the French cultural affairs journal L'Arc published a lengthy special issue dedicated
to Deleuze's work. Wedged in amongst the criticisms and encomiums of various luminaries, there is a marvellous 'conversation'
between Foucault and Deleuze pointedly entitled 'Intellectuals and
Power'. It first appeared in English in 1977 in Language, CounterMemory, Practice, a collection of Michel Foucault's interviews and
essays edited by Donald Bouchard, and for that reason it is usually
read by Anglo-American Foucauldians who treat it as a conveniently short exposition of Foucault's ideas on power in general and
the role of the intellectual in particular. Perhaps for the same reason
Anglo-American Deleuzians, with the signal exception of Michael
Hardt, have given it relatively little attention, though I would suggest
it can just as profitably be treated as a conveniently short exposition
of Deleuze's ideas on power in general and the role of the intellectual in particular.2 Indeed, inasmuch as Deleuze clearly uses the conversation to give notice of both the main themes and the principal
critical targets of his forthcoming book, Anti-Oedipus, it might even
be said to be the more concrete of the two. Deleuze pinpoints three
'areas of concern' that taken together adumbrate the schizoanalytic
project as a whole as it would be articulated in Anti-Oedipus. Firstly
he challenges the nature of the relation between theory and praxis,
arguing that the latter is neither simply an extension of the former
nor its inspiration; then he challenges the centrality of interest in
understanding the operation of power; and lastly he emphasizes the
importance of the microphysics of power and the potency of the
powerless's demands.
   Theory, Deleuze insists, 'is exactly like a tool box. It has nothing
to do with the signifier . . . A theory has to be used, it has to work.
And not just for itself (DI, 208/290).3 He goes on to suggest that
'theory is by nature opposed to power', but its ability to oppose
power is severely curtailed if it becomes too fixed in either its method
or its object (DI, 208/291). For this reason, Deleuze rejects the idea
of reform in favour of revolution, although it must be made clear that
by the latter he does not mean a militant overthrow of a governing

                                   22

                          OVERVIEW OF THEMES

body. Perhaps most interestingly of all, Deleuze short-circuits the
expected relation between theory and praxis. 'Praxis', he says, 'is a
network of relays from one theoretical point to another, and theory
relays one praxis to another.' But, he adds, a 'theory cannot be developed without encountering a wall, and praxis is needed to break
through.' (DI, 206/288). He goes on then to give the example of
Foucault's work on prisons which began by offering a theoretical
account of the penal system but soon felt the necessity, as Deleuze
puts it, of creating a relay to enable the imprisoned to speak for themselves. But, he insists, the GIP, Foucault's practical mechanism for
enabling the prisoners to speak for themselves, was never a matter of
the application of a theory. It was, rather, in language that is familiar
to us from the later A Thousand Plateaus, a matter of multiplicity.4

   For us, the intellectual and theorist have ceased to be a subject, a
   consciousness that represents or is representative. And those
   involved in political struggle have ceased to be represented,
   whether by a party or union that would in turn claim for itself the
   right to be their conscience. Who speaks and acts? It's always a
   multiplicity, even in the person who speaks or acts. We are all
   groupuscules. (DI, 207/289)

                         THEORY AND PRAXIS

Deleuze's hypothesis is that hitherto most theories of power,
particularly those developed by the Left, treat it as a problem of
interests - power is consolidated in the hands of a ruling class and
exercised according to a set of protocols that best serve their interests. The US invasion of Iraq in 2003, for instance, was blatantly in
the interest of the ruling elite in the US inasmuch as it offered a
tremendous opportunity for personal and corporate enrichment by
pushing up the price of oil and providing a colossal windfall of
lucrative 'no contest' and virtually 'no oversight' reconstruction contracts to swell the coffers without providing any tangible benefits for
the Iraqi people footing the bill. In actual fact, not only has the
ocean of money poured into reconstruction in Iraq failed to provide
any benefit to the Iraqi people, in many cases it has worsened their
situation. As British journalist Patrick Cockburn points out in his
pungent account of the US occupation of Iraq, despite the expenditure of hundreds of millions of dollars, basic civic infrastructure

                                   23

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

such as power, water and sewage is still well below prewar levels
four years after the official cessation of hostilities. Ironically, the
American-led reconstruction of Baghdad has proceeded much less
efficiently and effectively than did Saddam Hussein's regime following the first Gulf War.5 When faced with such egregious examples of
the (mis-)use of power, it is, as Deleuze puts it, perfectly obvious who
exploits, who profits, and who governs (DI, 212/296). Yet, having
said that, we are still faced with an important problem:

   how does it happen that those who have little stake in power
   follow, narrowly espouse, or grab for some piece of power?
   Perhaps it has to do with investments, as much economic as
   unconscious: there exist investments of desire which explain that
   one can if necessary desire not against one's interests, since inter-
   est always follows and appears wherever desire places it, but
   desire in a way that is deeper and more diffuse than one's interest.
   (DI, 212/296)

The problem of power is not only more complicated than the question of whose interests are being served it is also poorly formed if it
is formulated only in terms of interest because there are many other
varieties of power at work besides interest.
   For Deleuze, the only adequate way of posing the question of
power is in terms of desire. But one has to first of all abandon the
old binaries that distinguish between the powerful and the powerless, those who have power and the freedom to exercise it and those
who do not, because such rigid separations blind us to the real complexity of power relations. Power is a highly variegated substance
with both a consolidated (molar) and dispersed (molecular) form.
Consolidated and dispersed are not simply new codewords for
powerful and powerless, but a reconfiguration of our understanding
of how power actually works into the language of process. Every
substance has both a consolidated and a dispersed dimension,
depending on how you look at it. To the naked eye the human body
is a self-contained whole made up of solid state organs and limbs,
but under the microscope it is a vast multiplicity of cells which are
made up of even more microscopic entities which rely on the preexistence of still smaller entities and so on to infinity. The body never
ceases to be the body, regardless of how infinitesimal our gaze is, just
as the cells composing our body never cease in their being when we

                                   24

                         OVERVIEW OF THEMES

look up from the microscope. This is not to say that these two perspectives on the body are either arbitrary or merely notional because
the reality is that there is a very real tension between the molar and
the molecular that Deleuze and Guattari ascribe to the 'law of large
numbers'. Take the example of the elite athlete: if they over-train, or
push it too hard in competition, then the exertions of the molar
body, i.e., the body seen as a whole, lead to a rapid breakdown of the
molecular body; but, by the same token, it is precisely the condition
of the body in its molecular dimension that determines whether an
athlete will be great or not - they triumph or fail according to
whether their muscle fibres are composed one way and not another.
It might be said that the reason philosophy has been unable to
answer the question of 'what can a body do?' is that it hasn't found
the right way to pose the question so that it takes account of the
body's inherent multiplicity (ATP, 283/314). This is effectively
Deleuze's complaint about the standard conception of power as
interest: it doesn't take account of power's multiplicity.
   Politics, it follows, depends very much on how you look at things.
Naomi Klein's account of the potency and the vulnerability of the
corporations that seem to stand astride the postmodern world like
latter-day Titans is an excellent illustration of this point. By turns,
the brand is the expression of the power of the corporation to shape
the very look, feel, taste and texture of the contemporary world,
and, for this very reason, the weakest link in the multinational chain.
Irrespective of how lean its manufacturing and distribution networks are giant companies are vulnerable at the point of sale: if the
brand is tarnished the multinational corporation can be brought to
its knees by the simple fact of their products failing to sell in
sufficiently large numbers to sustain their machinic momentum. If
Disney loses its homely image or Coke its sense of fun, then the
unthinkable may happen: people may very well stop buying their
products. This is what makes the corporations such paranoid vigilantes when it comes to the control of their image. It explains, too,
why they are so litigious in protecting their images - image is everything. This is the one iota of hope Klein offers readers of No Logo,
which is otherwise an unremitting tale of woe recounting the successive loss of the authenticity, originality and indeed vitality of
global cultures. Culture-jamming, a kind of guerrilla aesthetic
which attacks the image itself by altering it in such a way as to transform it into an 'X-ray of the subconscious' of the underpinning sales

                                   25

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

message, is in its aggressive 'writing back' the expression of the
power of the otherwise powerless.6 When feminist culture-jammers
scrawl Teed me' beside images of emaciated supermodels and
emphasize their point that this conception of beauty is unhealthy by
transforming the models' deathly vacant faces into hideous skulls by
blacking out their eyes and teeth, they shatter the molar power of
the message 'buy me'. The net result of their attack is a molecular
multiplicity of messages, only some of which retain their original
appeal. Molecularized in this way, the advertisement loses some,
perhaps even its entire efficacy, as potential consumers contemplate
the real cost of the commodity they are considering purchasing.
Culture-jamming unleashes the pent-up negativity, scepticism and
cynicism capitalism simultaneously induces and contains.
   But to read Klein in a properly Deleuzian manner one has to read
the hopeful chapters on culture-jamming alongside the rather more
sobering chapters on the expropriation of cool because only then
does one see that the molecularizing power of culture-jamming is
precisely what enables the molarizing recuperation of dissent
implicit in the commodification of cool. Cool-hunting, the practice
of scouring the ghetto and the barrio for new style ideas and turning
them into the next 'latest thing' in fashion, is the flip-side of culturejamming: it converts the often facetious, ironic or parodic uses of
clothing found in disenfranchized 'have-not' communities into commodities for the 'have-yachts'. The baggy jeans hanging so low they
reveal the waistband of the underwear beneath which Calvin Klein
made its signature image in the late 1990s was in its original 'gangsta'
context a sign that its wearer had been incarcerated and functioned
semiotically as an assertion of 'street' credibility. Now, though, in its
decontextualized and suburbanized mode it is simply an excuse to
reveal a hitherto hidden label. As Klein herself argues, cool-hunting
is an extremely cynical exercise which 'feeds off the alienation at the
heart of America's race relations: selling white youth on their fetishisation of black style, and black youth on their fetishisation of
wealth'.7 In The Conquest of Cool, Thomas Frank demonstrates that
this cynicism conceals the corporate world's deep-seated reliance on
the so-called counterculture to create new markets. Capitalism willingly turns youthful rebellion into a business opportunity: thus the
 1960s refusal to wear standardized clothes, i.e., the same old boring
grey flannel suit father wore, and the same buttoned-up pinafore
dress mother wore, created the opening for what we today think of

                                    26

                         OVERVIEW OF THEMES

as simply fashion and the endless parade of apparently radical, new
forms of chic.8 In spite of itself, the culture of dissent turned out to
serve the interests of the very thing it was protesting against, namely
the archly conservative order of global capitalism. The conclusion
Deleuze and Guattari draw from this is not, however, the gloomy
idea at the heart of 'cynical reason' (Sloterdijk) that capital always
triumphs and therefore nothing can be done to change things. On
the contrary, they conclude that capitalism's very facility for
unleashing and containing change means that it is tapping into a
highly unstable energy source, namely desire, which in their view is
revolutionary by nature, and is therefore extremely vulnerable.9

                   RENOVATING PSYCHOANALYSIS

Deleuze and Guattari's schizoanalytic revolution hinges on their
renovation of the psychoanalytic concept of the unconscious.10 As
will be seen in what follows, Deleuze and Guattari preserve this basic
model of the unconscious; they even keep to Freud's tripartite way
of thinking about it; but they change its internal dynamics. First of
all, they reject the notion that it is the unconscious that pressures the
conscious; on the contrary, they say, it is the conscious that pressures
the unconscious (AO, 371/404). Instead of a model of the unconscious containing a host of unruly thoughts, a veritable 'aboriginal
population in the mind' (as Freud put it, in one of his more unfortunate phrasings), constantly trying to penetrate the barrier between
the two systems, what Deleuze and Guattari envision is something
like a head full of unruly thoughts that have been made to look into
the mirror by a domineering conscious only to be told they are something other than what they see.11 These changes will become more
apparent if we set them against the background of Freud's work.
   Freud conceives the unconscious in three interrelated ways: dynamically, topographically and economically. However, it was not until his
1915 paper The Unconscious' that he brought these strands together
in a systematic way. This same paper is credited by Deleuze and
Guattari with the discovery of 'desiring-production', which as will
become clear in what follows is the essential conceptual bedrock of
their position. In a very provisional way, we can say it is simply
their word for what Freud called 'das Es', adopting the term from
Georg Groddeck, who in turn adopted it from his teacher Ernst
Schweninger. Idiosyncratically, Freud's English translator rendered

                                   27

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S/WVTV-OED/PUS

'das Es' as 'Id' rather than 'It', which would have been more strictly
correct, in order to be consistent with the use of the Greek word 'Ego'
for T with which it forms a complex binary pair.12 But as Freud
himself acknowledged, it was really Nietzsche who first gave the word
the sense it has today.13 Id is psychic energy in its raw state. Id is a force
inside us which is by nature compulsive, driving, impersonal, hungry,
insatiable, sexual, aggressive, creative and destructive - it lives in
us, but we experience it as 'other'. In his Introductory Lectures on
Psychoanalysis, written and delivered between 1915 and 1917, Freud
describes the processes of the unconscious corresponding to the id as
being like a rowdy guest one has ejected from a lecture theatre who
nonetheless continues to hammer on the door even after his banishment causing such a ruckus that one is compelled to post a guard.
This hypothesis is at the basis of all Freud's speculations concerning
the formation and function of the mind. Slips of the tongue are
simply instances of that rowdy guest evading the guard and making
an unscheduled appearance in the conscious; while symptoms are
simply the lengths we feel we must go to in order to avoid this same
rowdy guest once and for all. Freud views the unconscious as an
atavistic reservoir of dark passions that 'we' as civilized subjects of a
modern society have learned to keep at bay. Civilization, as Freud
understands it, by which he simply means any form of collective
society, can only be had at the price of taming the 'Id'.
   On this view of things, the conscious mind is beset by the constant
pressure of what it perceives to be dark and disturbing thoughts and
impulses it feels it must keep under wraps in the unconscious or
cause unpleasure for itself, so it represses them in the unconscious.
But this is precisely the view of the unconscious that Deleuze and
Guattari reject. Therefore it is impossible to maintain that desiringproduction is another word for id. Desiring-production is not simply
id by another name as the ambiguous opening paragraph of AntiOedipus might seem to suggest; it is not, in other words, a reservoir
of repressed desires applying pressure to a beleaguered ego.14
Desiring-production cannot be equated with id, despite the apparent similarities, because on Freud's definition the id has no access to
reality except through the agency of the ego's connection to what
Freud calls the perception-conscious system, which is inconsistent
with what Deleuze and Guattari say about the function of
machines.15 Machines, they say, connect us to reality. If a Freudian
analogy is needed, then desiring-production would be functionally

                                      28

                           OVERVIEW OF THEMES

equivalent to the system of the unconscious as a whole. The crucial
implication of this statement, which isn't immediately obvious, is
that it is the 'faults' or 'glitches' in the process of desire that result in
us winding up schizophrenic, neurotic or perverted or whatever. But
this is perhaps the wrong way of putting it since Deleuze and
Guattari do not offer a model or picture of what the system would
like look if it were free of glitches, except in the negative extreme of
death. Thus to be faulty is to be alive - our glitches make us who we
are. And as Woody Allen might put it, we can neither live with them
or without them. This explains why desiring-production is the
effective category (which means something rather more specific than
the translator's rendering of it as 'principal concern' - it refers to that
part of the 'psychical apparatus' which is determining in relation to
the other parts) of schizoanalysis - it is not at the level of desiringmachines, which are in their own way cognates of the Freudian
notions of the drive and the symptom, that a schizoanalytic 'cure' is
effected. The 'cure' is rather an affair of desiring-production, of
getting it going and giving it somewhere to go other than into the
void.
   The whole of psychoanalysis stands on this assumption that there
are types of thoughts or ideas that the conscious, forged in the crucible of contemporary social life as it is, cannot tolerate and is therefore obliged to repress. In the popular imagination, it is usually
assumed that these thoughts are unrealizable sexual fantasies and
though that isn't completely wrong it isn't the whole story either. The
conscious not only represses illicit sexual desires, it also represses
thoughts and ideas it deems illogical, irrational or impossible. For
this reason the process of sorting through which ideas may pass into
the conscious and which may not is variously known as 'censorship'
and 'reality testing'. The unconscious, in all its aspects, is the source
of these intolerable ideas and it is the job of the censors to keep them
there. Freud describes his first conceptualization of the unconscious
as dynamic because what he sought to register is the transformability of thoughts and ideas - they can be unconscious to begin with
and later become conscious, just as they can be conscious to begin
with and later become unconscious. The unconscious thought or
idea is generally known as 'latent' because it is capable of becoming
conscious. The psychoanalytic cure is effected by finding the means
of clearing the way for the latent thought to become manifest. The
assumption is that the latent thought sticks in the unconscious like

                                     29

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

a thorn in the flesh, constantly worrying away at us until it has
broken through all the barriers and found its way to the conscious.
But since we fear that above all, we are constantly exercised to find
fresh ways of preventing this from happening. So having repressed
the thought once, we repress it again, and moreover we repress
those things which might remind us of the thing we've repressed.
The first instance of repression Freud calls 'primal repression'; the
second, ongoing repression, which takes aim at associations and
reminders of the original repression, Freud calls 'repression proper'.
In therapy, these repressions take the form of 'resistances', they are
the impediments to the cure, which paradoxically enough has to
undo all the repressions. Because the only way the idea-thorn we
have repressed can be removed once and for all is by exposing it to
light. It has to be made manifest by being put into words, which is
why psychoanalysis is known as the 'talking cure'.
   The incompleteness of this modelling of the unconscious is
obvious: it doesn't account for where thoughts go when they become
unconscious, nor does it account for why some thoughts and not
others are condemned to confinement in the unconscious. These
gaps would duly be filled by the addition of a topographic and then
economic modelling of the unconscious. The topographic conception of the unconscious treats the unconscious and the conscious as
distinct spatial realms. This spatialization of the unconscious has no
correlate in the anatomy; it refers exclusively to the disposition of
the psychical apparatus. Its purpose is to account for the hypothesis
that thoughts and ideas are presented differently in each of the two
domains: in the conscious system the thought or idea is presented
along with the word belonging to it; whereas in the unconscious
system the thought or idea is presented alone. As Freud observes,
with respect to the symptoms of one of his most famous patients,
the Wolf-Man, there is scant similarity at the level of the thing
between squeezing a pimple and ejaculating and still less between a
sock and a vagina, but verbally both pimples and penises can be said
to 'spurt', while socks and vaginas can both be said to be 'dark
holes'. The Wolf-Man's associations are thus dictated by a similarity at the level of words, not things, and this (Freud thinks) is how
schizophrenia works: it is a loss of reality manifesting itself as the
confusion of words for things.16 The economic conceptualization of
the unconscious, which completes the picture, is by far the most consequential of the three ways of conceiving the operations of the

                                  30

                         OVERVIEW OF THEMES

unconscious. In moving from the dynamic and topographic to the
economic we shift from a qualitative to a quantitative model of the
unconscious. On the economic view of things, unconscious thoughts
are conceived as a quantity of psychic energy that is looking for an
outlet to discharge itself - this is what Freud means by cathexis.
   Deleuze and Guattari consider the turn toward Oedipus, which
psychoanalysis made relatively late in its development (it was 'discovered' by Freud in 1897 in the course of the self-analysis that led
to the writing of The Interpretation of Dreams, but wasn't generalized into a model of the unconscious until 1923 in The Ego and the
Id), a long mistake' whose history they undertake to write. They
consider it a mistake inasmuch that Freud's first discovery was 'the
domain of free syntheses where everything is possible: endless
connections, nonexclusive disjunctions, non-specific conjunctions,
partial objects and flows'. (AO, 61/63). In other words, psychoanalysis was a form of schizoanalysis to begin with, but then took a wrong
turning. In this respect, psychoanalysis is (they say) like the Russian
Revolution; no one knows when it started to go bad, or how far one
has to go back to locate the source or point of its wrong turning. To
the Americans? To the First International? To the secret Committee?
To the first ruptures, which signify renunciations by Freud as much
as betrayals by those who break with him? To Freud himself, from
the moment of "discovery" of Oedipus?' (AO, 62/64). The crucial
point is that Freud was not unaware of desiring-production, indeed
in Deleuze and Guattari's view he discovered it, but for some reason
he chose to turn his back on it. In consequence of this decision, psychoanalysis became an instrument of repression, one that was all the
more insidious for appearing to be the opposite of that, for appearing to liberate the discourse of the unconscious when in fact what
it did was force it to speak in a language of myths and fantasies,
never anything real. But the greater loss, and the greater mistake, as
it were, was the compromising of the two correlates of Freud's initial
discovery, namely the

   direct confrontation between desiring-production and social pro-
   duction, between symptomological and collective formations,
   given their identical nature and their differing regimes; and on the
   other hand, the repression that the social machine exercises on
   desiring-machines, and the relationship of psychic repression
   with social repression. (AO, 61/63)

                                  31

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S^JVTY-OED/PUS

   The trouble is, once it is in place, Oedipus appropriates desiringproduction's outputs for itself, which then appear as its products,
making it seem that our symptoms, dreams, delusions, and so on,
were Oedipal after all (AO, 63/66). The principal mistake, then, was
to put the social beyond the reach of desire. This in turn rendered it
unfit for a concrete connection with Marxism.

   [W]hat does it mean to say that Freud discovered Oedipus in his
   own self-analysis? Was it in his self-analysis, or rather in his
   Goethian classical culture? In his self-analysis he discovers some-
   thing about which he remarks: Well now, that looks like Oedipus!
   (AO, 62/64)

As readers of Freud's Interpretation of Dreams are aware, Freud's
rationale for focusing on the story of Oedipus is that Oedipus's
destiny can only continue to move us some two thousand years after
it was written because it expresses an eternal truth, something that
our unconscious recognizes and responds to even if our conscious
does not. 'His destiny', Freud writes, 'moves us only because it might
have been ours - because the oracle laid the same curse upon us
before our birth as upon him. It is the fate of all of us, perhaps, to
direct our first sexual impulse towards our mother and our first
hatred and our first murderous wish against our father. Our dreams
convince us that this is so.'17 This brief passage has inspired countless literary critics to respond to literature, and subsequently film
and virtually all forms of aesthetic production, in a similar way: to
assume that their response to the work expresses not merely a personal predilection or taste for such and such a piece, but rather an
eternal truth about their humanity, their inner and as it were primordial desires beyond their knowing. Not only that, psychoanalysis assumes that our response to all aesthetic works is somehow a
response to this one play by Sophocles, that regardless of what we're
reading, listening to or looking at, it is always as if it were Oedipus
Rex. And there is the essential thing: the reproduction of desire
gives way to a simple representation, in the process as well as the
theory of the cure.' (AO, 61/63-4). Psychoanalysis is obviously more
sophisticated than this rough summary allows, but in the years since
Freud first made his 'discovery' psychoanalysis has simply disguised
this basic premise by transforming it into a structural model. Thus
the supposedly Oedipal desire for our mother has been transposed

                                  32

                         OVERVIEW OF THEMES

into a structural desire for the forbidden; and our first murderous
hatred toward our father has been transposed into a structural
agency of prohibition that has been variously associated with
authority figures in particular (such as bosses, generals, presidents
and so forth) and the socially imposed regulation of conduct in
general. In the process, Oedipus is doubled, or becomes in effect
what Bateson referred to as a double-bind, because now it is either
something we identify with and the cause of a 'crisis', or it is a symbolic structure into which we can insert ourselves only at the price of
disavowing our innermost desires and hence the source of perpetual
inner 'conflict' (AO, 90/98).
   But just because Deleuze and Guattari are anti-representation,
that doesn't mean they are somehow against the idea that literature
can tell us anything about how the unconscious works. It is obvious
from the opening pages of Anti-Oedipus that literature is very
important to Deleuze and Guattari - the literary references always
outnumber the clinical references when it comes to exemplifying
what schizophrenia is like: for every Schreber there is an Artaud
(who probably was schizophrenic himself, but nonetheless wrote literature rather than memoirs of his neurotic illness) and a Beckett;
for every Wolf-Man there is a Nerval (who also was probably a schizophrenic, or at least a manic depressive) and a Buchner, and so on.
These works by Artaud, Beckett, Buchner and Nerval (and we could
add Michaux, Moritz, Proust and Rimbaud, to list only some of the
most frequently cited) do not represent schizophrenia; they don't
offer us representations of schizophrenia; they are, in Deleuze and
Guattari's vernacular, schizophrenia 'in person'. It is not the author
that is schizophrenic in other words, although that may also be the
case, but the work itself. 'Engels demonstrated', they write, that

   an author is great because he cannot prevent himself from tracing
   flows and causing them to circulate, flows that split asunder the
   catholic and despotic signifier of his work, and that necessarily
   nourish a revolutionary machine on the horizon. That's what
   style is, or rather the absence of style - asyntactic, agrammatical:
   the moment when language is no longer defined by what it says,
   even less by what makes it a signifying thing, but what it causes it
   to move, to flow, and to explode - desire. For literature is like
   schizophrenia: a process and not a goal, a production and not an
   expression. (AO, 145/158-9)

                                  33

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S/IA/77-OED/PUS

But, in their view, literature is a rare art, and one that is highly vulnerable to the destructive influence of capitalism. 'Every writer is a
sellout. The only literature is that which places an explosive device
in its package, fabricating a counterfeit currency, causing the superego and its form of expression to explode, as well as the market value
of its form of content.' (AO, 146/160). It is not by accident that
Deleuze and Guattari's one collaborative book specifically on literature, namely their book on Kafka, focuses on a writer who
famously published virtually nothing in his own lifetime.18 In published work, particularly in the case of successful authors like
F. Scott Fitzgerald, another author Deleuze and Guattari very much
admire, it becomes too difficult to separate out desire from the sticky
entanglements of interest.
   The difference between these two ways of approaching the unconscious (as reservoir of repressed thoughts and fantasies or as a productive process which gives rise to machines) can readily be seen by
comparing Freud's account of Schreber's delirium with Deleuze and
Guattari's. Whereas Freud insists that behind all the elements of
Schreber's impressively complicated delusional world (replete with
talking birds, an upper and lower god, as well as the constant threat
of soul-murder), stand real people (usually his parents), Deleuze
and Guattari argue that these are merely so many 'intensities'
through which his delirium moves. Whereas psychoanalysis regards
the content of delirium as constituting a rebus which can be decoded
by reading it against the eternal puzzle-solution of the Oedipus
complex, schizoanalysis argues that it has no content, just a constantly evolving grid of flows and break-flows (schizzes). Thus, to
take only one example, Freud interprets Schreber's 'becomingwoman', his feeling that he must become a woman because the Order
of Things requires him to do so for the salvation of the world, as an
expression of his ambivalent feelings for his father, which according
to the Oedipal model are a supposed to be a combination of resentment and supplication. Psychoanalysis takes the view that the son
regards his father as a rival for the mother's affection. But the son
also knows that the father is too powerful a rival to be deposed, so
he tries instead to supplicate him by taking a passive attitude
towards him, which for obvious reasons provokes resentment in the
son.19 Using the Oedipal template, Freud quickly finds confirmation
of his thesis in Schreber's writing - God represents Schreber's psychiatrist Dr Flechsig, and in turn stands in for Schreber's father. But

                                   34

                         OVERVIEW OF THEMES

in doing so, he neglects the political and historical content of
Schreber's delusion, reducing it all down to Oedipal metaphors (AO,
64/66; 98/107). Although Freud acknowledges that Schreber's father
was an influential medical doctor famous throughout Germany for
his advocacy of the virtues of exercise and the outdoors, he neglects
to mention the bizarre orthopaedic machines for correcting posture
and so forth that the good doctor patented (AO, 327/353). In contrast to Freud, then, Deleuze and Guattari play down the significance of the father and play up the significance of the political and
historical content.

   The psychoanalyst tells us that the father is important precisely
   because Schreber doesn't talk about him. We reply that we have
   never seen a schizophrenic delirium that is not firstly about race,
   racism, politics, that does not begin in all directions from history,
   that does not involve culture, that does not speak of continents,
   kingdoms, and so forth. We state that the problem of delirium is
   not connected to the family, and concerns the father and mother
   only in a very secondary way, if it concerns them at all. (CY, 80)

   Perhaps the main difference, though, between psychoanalysis and
schizoanalysis is this: Freud maintains that there is a metapsychological cause to Schreber's illness (namely his homosexual feelings
towards Dr Flechsig) whereas Deleuze and Guattari insist that its
cause is organic. 'In this sense, we believe in a biochemistry of schizophrenia (in conjunction with a biochemistry of drugs), that will be
progressively more capable of determining the nature' of this illness
(AO, 93/100). With respect to delirium, Deleuze and Guattari very
clearly take the view that the schizophrenic does not decide to see the
world that way, nor can they decide not to see the world that way.
The schizophrenic is a person who, for whatever reason has been
touched off by a desiring flow which threatens the social order.' (CY,
222). Something 'clicks' in the schizophrenic and their psychical
apparatus shifts into a kind of overdrive, generating ideas, images,
thoughts and feelings of greater intensity than anything previously
known or experienced. In consequence of this shifting of gears, their
process of production, their way of processing and synthesizing
data and stimuli (both internal and external), alters in its mode of
operation.20 Schizophrenia enacts a regime change in the mind.
Confirmation of the inference that Deleuze and Guattari attribute

                                   35

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

an organic cause to schizophrenia can be found in three places: first,
contrary to Freud, Deleuze and Guattari take the view that schizophrenia's symptoms aren't penetrable by interpretation; second,
contrary to psychiatry, which views schizophrenia as abnormal,
Deleuze and Guattari take the view that the schizo process is completely normal (it is not the schizophrenic process that makes the
schizo ill, they argue, but the environment in which he or she finds
himself); and third, as I've already mentioned, Deleuze and Guattari
speak in favour of drug therapy (CY, 86; ATP 313/347). This last
point is especially telling - there would be no point in attempting to
treat schizophrenia with psychotropic drugs if it was caused simply
by an unfavourable reaction to one's childhood, as if we were
somehow sick from our childhood.
   Freud concluded that Schreber's delusions amounted to a 'loss of
reality', and proposed that this constituted one of the main symptoms of schizophrenia. He took Schreber's delusional world to mean
that he was becoming disconnected from the 'real world' and thereby
falling into a dark world of his own imagining.21 And insofar as
Schreber insisted that he had sunbeams in his ass, it is hard to see
how or why one should refute Freud's conclusion. It seems patently
obvious that Schreber's grip on reality was profoundly diminished.
Yet Deleuze and Guattari argue that the opposite is the case - far
from suffering a 'loss of reality', the schizophrenic suffers from 'too
much reality', the operative word being 'suffers'. The schizophrenic
'suffers' from 'too much reality' in the sense that this experience can
be and often is both painful and distressing; but they also 'suffer'
from 'too much reality' in the technical sense that the experience is
completely involuntary (CY, 86). This feeling, usually referred to in
psychiatric and psychoanalytic discourse as 'psychosis', in which the
impossible and the possible have fused into one continuous reality,
is the clinical basis of Deleuze and Guattari's entire project (DI,
234/326). In Anti-Oedipus they narrate the lived experience of the
passage to psychosis as a kind of 'breakthrough', as the breaching
of the notional but nevertheless real wall separating reason from
unreason. But, as they are always quick to add, it is a 'breakthrough'
which carries with it the constant risk of a 'breakdown', which can
take one of two forms: either a lapse into speechless catatonia, or an
endless nonsensical jabbering - 'I am God I was not God I am a
clown of God . . .' (AO, 86/92). Their hypothesis is that what we see
through the cracks in the wall between reason and unreason caused

                                  36

                         OVERVIEW OF THEMES

by the irruption of the schizophrenic process are the operations of
the unconscious at their most primitive, functional level, namely that
of something they call 'desiring-production'. As we'll see in the next
chapter, this is where the desiring-machines come into being; this is
where the desiring-machines do their work.

                                 37

                                CHAPTER 3

                       READING THE TEXT

  We don't claim to have written a madman's book, just a book in which
  one no longer knows - and there is no reason to know - who exactly
  is speaking, a doctor, a patient, an untreated patient, a present, past,
  or future patient. That's why we used so many writers and poets; who
  is to say if they are speaking as patients or doctors - patients or doctors
  of civilisation.
                               Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, 'In Flux'

  Is it our fault that Lawrence, Miller, Kerouac, Burroughs, Artaud,
  and Beckett know more about schizophrenia than psychiatrists and
  psychoanalysts?
                                          Gilles Deleuze, Negotiations

                           DESIRING-MACHINES

In the various interviews they gave following the publication of AntiOedipus, Deleuze invariably says that their starting point was the
concept of the desiring-machine, the invention of which he attributes
to Guattari. There is no record of how Guattari came up with the idea,
but on the evidence of his recently published notebooks, The AntiOedipus Papers, his clinical experience at La Borde had a large part to
play. As Deleuze tells it, Guattari came to him with an idea for a productive unconscious, built around the concept of desiring-machines.
In its first formulation, though, it was judged by them both to be too
structuralist to achieve the kind of radical breakthrough in understanding how desire functions that they were both looking for in their
own ways. At the time, according to Deleuze, he was working - 'rather
timidly' in his own estimation - 'solely with concepts' and could see

                                      38

                            READING THE TEXT

that Guattari's ideas were a step beyond where his thinking had
reached (N, 13/24). Unsurprisingly, Guattari's version of events
concurs with Deleuze's, though he credits the latter with being the one
whose thinking had advanced the furthest. Guattari describes himself
as wanting to work with Deleuze both to make his break with
Lacanian formulations more thoroughgoing and to give greater
system and order to his ideas. But as we've already seen their collaboration was also always more than a simple exchange of ideas, each providing the other with something they lacked. They were both looking
for a discourse that was both political and psychiatric but didn't
reduce one dimension to the other. Neither seemed to think he could
discover it on his own (N, 13/24). To put it another way, we could say
that Deleuze and Guattari were both of the view that a mode of analysis that insists on filtering everything through the triangulating lens of
daddy-mommy-me could not hope to explain either why or how May
'68 happened, nor indeed why it went they way it did. The students at
the barricades may have been rebelling against the 'paternal' authority of the state, but they were also rebelling against the very idea of the
state and the former does not explain the latter.
    The principal goal of Anti-Oedipus was to achieve a theoretical
rapprochement between psychoanalysis and Marxism in order to
create a new method of critical analysis (one better suited to the
tenor of the times, as they saw things) which the authors provocatively refer to as either 'materialist psychiatry' or 'schizoanalysis'
(the terms are used interchangeably). To achieve this goal, it had to
accomplish two things:

   1. introduce desire into the conceptual mechanism used to understand
      social production and reproduction, making it part of the very infra-
      structure of daily life;
   2. introduce the notion of production into the concept of desire, thus
      removing the artificial boundary separating the machinations of
      desire from the realities of history.

These two objectives define the priorities of the first chapter.

                      Schizophrenic out for a stroll

The opening pages of Anti-Oedipus are undoubtedly the most obscure
in the whole book. Yet we shouldn't let their apparent opacity deceive

                                    39

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

us into thinking they are without purpose or design. The case studies
of Schreber, Lenz and Malone, with which Anti-Oedipus somewhat
infamously opens, have three aims:

   1. to distinguish between schizophrenia as process and schizophrenia as
      illness;
   2. to identify the operative elements of the schizophrenic process;
   3. to demonstrate that the schizophrenic process is the basic matrix of
      the unconscious.

Schizophrenia, Deleuze and Guattari say, is a 'harrowing, emotionally overwhelming experience, which brings the schizo as close as
possible to matter, to a burning, living centre of matter' (AO, 21/26).
However, their view is that it is not the disease process but the treatment which is the true cause of the catatonic zombies and ranting
paranoiacs that haunt the popular imagination. The disease itself,
providing its process isn't brought to an abrupt halt (through
isolation in a lockdown ward), or allowed to turn in a void (through
interminable analysis of the content of delusions), can give rise to
tremendous flights of imagination and has undoubtedly been responsible for some of the greatest works of art throughout history. Thus
the schizophrenic process is not the same thing as schizophrenia, the
illness, which Deleuze and Guattari readily acknowledge can be a distressing and debilitating disease. Essentially, what Deleuze and
Guattari want to demonstrate is this: the schizophrenic, in the full
flight of delirium, reveals to us the true nature of desire as a synthetic
process. The schizophrenic process, then, is Deleuze and Guattari's
model of how desire works. 'Before being a mental state of the schizophrenic who has made himself into an artificial person through
autism, schizophrenia is the process of the production of desire and
desiring-machines.' (AO, 26/31-2). Deleuze and Guattari are not
saying that everyone is really schizophrenic, albeit without being
aware of it. And they do not intend to pulverize the subject beyond
all measure or order as Perry Anderson pessimistically supposes.1
Nor do they romanticize the schizophrenic as others have charged
(N, 23/37). Rather, what they are saying is that we can learn a great
deal from schizophrenic delirium because it lays bare the material
processes of the unconscious. As I will show in more detail below,
their argument is that schizophrenic delirium could not take the
forms it does if the unconscious was not, as they put it, machinic. The

                                    40

                           READING THE TEXT

distinction between schizophrenia as process and schizophrenia as
illness is the necessary precondition for the next two points, namely
the identification of the operative elements of the schizophrenic
process and the mapping of those elements against the processes of
the unconscious.
   Regarding the second point - the identification of the operative
elements of the schizophrenic process - the principal conclusion
Deleuze and Guattari draw from the first three case studies (and
reaffirm with every example that follows) is this: the schizophrenic is
both Homo natura and Homo historia. What do they mean by this?
As they themselves indicate, they are not saying schizophrenics are
organically predisposed to an interest in nature; nor are they saying
that an interest in nature can be used as a sign and symptom of the
disease. 'We are not attempting to make nature one of the poles of
schizophrenia. What the schizophrenic lives, both as an individual
and as a member of the human species, is not at all any one specific
aspect of nature, but nature as & process of production' (AO, 3/9
translation modified, emphasis added). For instance, it is not Lenz's
interest in rocks, metals, water and plants per se that signals the
underlying presence of schizophrenia. More telling, in Deleuze and
Guattari's view, is the way he regards these elements. It is how he sees
things, not what he sees that is instructive.
    Biichner's Lenz is obviously not the first artist to be inspired by
the magnificence of the natural environment, or the first to wax so
lyrically about it. But in contrast to other Romantic artists, who have
similarly seen fit to make nature their subject, Lenz perceives in the
natural elements a profound presence of Life, not just a strange and
terrible beauty. Here Deleuze and Guattari take the opposite view to
R.D. Laing who writes (speaking of Beckett's characters as it
happens) that in the schizophrenic world 'there is no contradictory
sense of the self in its "health and validity" to mitigate the despair,
terror, and boredom of existence'.2 It is not simply that as Lenz sees
them, the earth, the wind, the water and so on are infused with a life
of their own (although that is important too), but that there is something vaster, more embracing, more uplifting, there too, something
on the order of the Cosmos, and it is this that he longs to be a part
of. Lenz 'thought he should draw the storm right into himself,
embrace all things within his being, he spread and lay over the entire
earth, he burrowed his way into the All, it was an ecstasy that hurt;
or else he stopped and laid his head in the moss and half closed his

                                   41

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

eyes, then everything receded far away, the earth beneath him
shrank'.3 In other words, the fact that he sees flowers respiring with
the moon's nocturnal cycle is one sign among several of Lenz's
altered state of mind. He is preoccupied with machines.

   Everything is a machine. Celestial Machines, the stars or rain-
   bows in the sky, alpine machines - all of them connected to those
   of his body. The continual whirr of machines. '[Lenz] thought
   that it must be a feeling of endless bliss to be in contact with the
   profound life of every form, to have a soul for rocks, metals,
   water, and plants, to take himself, as into a dream, every element
   of nature, like flowers that breathe with the waxing and waning
   of the moon.' To be a chlorophyll- or a photosynthesis-machine,
   or at least slip his body into such machines as one part among the
   others. (AO, 2/8)

   It is this preoccupation with machines that is the surest sign of the
presence of the disease. Each of these machines, each of these possible states of being, is a zone of intensity that Lenz passes through.
Lenz is Homo natura because he feels he is at one with the production of nature, but he is Homo historia inasmuch as he registers that
production of nature as though it were somebody other than himself
who was witnessing it. His ego is evacuated from its position in the
centre of his sense of subject-hood. It can be said, to paraphraze
Deleuze and Guattari, that there is no Lenz-the-self, author of dramatic works, who suddenly loses his mind and supposedly identifies
with all sorts of strange states of being (blissful contact with rocks,
metals, plants, and so on); rather, there is the Lenzian subject who
passes through a series of states, and who identifies these states with
the elements of nature as so many names from history (there is in
this regard little difference between saying 'I am a rock' and 1 am
Attila the Hun').
   Following Pierre Klossowski's account of Nietzsche's fall into
madness, Deleuze and Guattari argue that schizo subject is produced - produces itself in other words - as a residiuum or spare part
that sits alongside the desiring-machine, which by virtue of the
disease process now occupies centre stage. The states of intensity -
e.g., his feeling for the 'soul' of rocks and so forth - through which
the subject passes in its bid to relocate its centre form concentric
circles around the desiring-machine. The subject passes through the

                                   42

                           READING THE TEXT

specific band of intensity of one circle and then passes on to the next
circle, like so many circles of hell. He is at one with the rocks, then
water, then plants, and so on. As Klossowski puts it:

   The centrifugal forces do not flee the centre forever, but approach
   it once again, only to retreat from it yet again: such is the nature
   of the violent oscillations that overwhelm an individual so long
   as he seeks only his own centre and is incapable of seeing the circle
   of which he himself is a part; for if these oscillations overwhelm
   him, it is because each one of them corresponds to an individual
   other than the one he believes himself to be, from the point of
   view of the unlocatable centre. As a result, an identity is essen-
   tially fortuitous, and a series of individualities must be undergone
   by each of these oscillations, so that as a consequence the fortu-
   itousness of this or that particular individuality will render all of
   them necessary, (cited in AO, 22/27-8)

Hence Lenz's desire to burrow into the All, to find the place where
the radiating circles originate, the place he supposes must be calm,
the zero degree of intensity.
   The point that needs to be emphasized here is that if Lenz was not
schizophrenic, if he wasn't in the grip of a schizophrenic episode, his
walk through the mountains would have had a completely different
texture. Doubtless it would lack the intensity of feeling apparent in
Buchner's beautiful evocation of the troubled writer's mental life.
The flowers would just be flowers, the earth merely dirt under foot,
which is why Deleuze and Guattari insist on schizophrenia's inherent creativity, its productivity.4 Everything is a machine to Lenz
because he is a schizophrenic. The celestial machines, the alpine
machine, the chlorophyll-machine and the photosynthesis-machine
he perceives all around him or somehow feels are at work within him
are all manifestations of the disease process. The same must be said
of the eccentricities of Schreber and Malone and the many other
equally strange characters whose stories are threaded throughout
the pages of Anti-Oedipus. Deleuze and Guattari do not say schizophrenia is everywhere; rather what they say is that desiringproduction is everywhere, but it is only visible to us in its raw state
in schizophrenic delirium. Desiring-production is their neologism
for a conception of desire infused with production - the first of their
two strategic goals.

                                   43

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4/V77-OED/PUS

   Deleuze and Guattari will later qualify their definition of desiringproduction in a very important way that will help put the first chapter
in perspective. Desiring-production is that aspect of the operation of
the unconscious that cannot be assimilated by what they refer to as
social production and reproduction, or more simply as the socius
(AO, 189/204). As we'll see in what follows, desiring-production is that
aspect of desire that the body without organs as the agent of antiproduction is unable to contain, unable to force onto its smooth
surface and thereby repress it (the Body without Organs is in fact
defined by Deleuze and Guattari as the site of primary repression
[AO, 10/15]). Larry Clark's short film Impaled', which was his contribution to the collective project entitled Destricted, offers an excellent, albeit rather graphic, illustration of what is meant here. The film
begins with a series of interviews with young men who have answered
an advertisement looking for people interested in working in pornographic films, but who haven't yet had any actual experience in that
profession. From the short list of guys one is chosen and he then interviews several women who are professional pornographic movie performers. He then chooses one that he would most like to have sex with
and they duly do a 'scene' together. What makes this film interesting
for our purposes here is that the camera doesn't stop running between
takes, not even when there is the need to clean up after a messy
attempt at anal sex. In these moments, which would not normally be
included in a pornographic film, we suddenly realize that contrary to
popular perception pornography does not 'show it all' (as Zizek puts
it5), but only displays that which can be coded as belonging to the
domain of the 'sexual'. This domain, at least insofar as pornography
is concerned, does not include the necessary interruptions to the performance of the sexual act that filming requires - such as the need to
move the camera, alter lighting, revive a flagging male star, and so on.
The distinction between eroticism and pornography is in this sense
more apparent than real because neither 'show it all'. Both modes
have at the core an element of anti-production, a body without
organs, selecting what can and cannot be shown. Showing all really
means showing that which eludes or estranges (in Brecht's sense)
erotic overcoding and this is precisely what Larry Clark's film does.
   It is in this sense, then, that Deleuze and Guattari define the schizophrenic as the limit of the socius, the instance of a pure asociality
which terrifies every social organization. The schizophrenic is the
living instance of the socially unassimilable being, or what Hardt

                                   44

                           READING THE TEXT

and Negri refer to as the 'new barbarian' (the body incapable of obedience or submission).6 Desiring-production is that aspect of desire
which if it were to pass into social production and reproduction
would sow the seeds of disorder and revolution as it does every time
a little piece of it manages to elude the coding society imposes on it
so as to contain it. That is why we only see desiring-production in its
pure state in pathological cases, it only shows up where the apparatuses of the social machinery have ceased to function. At length,
then, we can say this is why the schizo going for a stroll is a better
model than the neurotic on the couch - it reveals the schizophrenic
process and in doing so tells us something essential about the way
the unconscious works. But this picture of the schizophrenic as
Homo natura and Homo historia is far from a complete account of
Deleuze and Guattari's analysis of the schizophrenic process.

               The traditional logic of desire is all wrong

There is still a step to be made between this account of the schizophrenic process as it operates in known cases of schizophrenia and
the third aim of the case analyses under discussion here, namely the
claim that this process is the basic matrix of the unconscious. As I
mentioned above, Deleuze and Guattari are of the view that the
schizophrenic deliriums they discuss could not take the forms they
do if desiring-production, the motive force behind all delirium, did
not work the way they say it does. In other words, they arrive at their
understanding of desiring-production via a process of deduction.
Like a pair of detectives they ask, 'Given a certain effect, what
machine is capable of producing it? And given a machine, what can
it be used for?' (AO, 3/8).

   Can we possibly guess, for instance, what a knife rest is used for
   if all we are given is a geometrical description of it? Or yet
   another example: on being confronted with a complete machine
   made up of six stones in the right-hand pocket of my coat (the
   pocket that serves as the source of the stones), five stones in the
   right-hand pocket of my trousers, and five in my left-hand pocket
   (transmission pockets), with the remaining pocket of my coat
   receiving the stones that have already been handled, as each of the
   stones moves forward one pocket, how can we determine the
   effect of this circuit of distribution in which the mouth, too, plays

                                   45

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   a role as a stone-sucking machine? Where in this entire circuit do
   we find the production of sexual pleasure? (AO, 3/8)

It is the final question - where do we find the production of sexual
pleasure? - which is the most telling, because what it points to is an
essential difference between psychoanalysis and schizoanalysis at the
level of their respective starting premises. Psychoanalysis assumes
that all behaviour which isn't manifestly sexual, but isn't obviously
ordinary or mundane either (i.e., nonsexual), must somehow be a
substitute for sex, a perversion in other words. This is where Deleuze
and Guattari part ways with Freud.

  We have difficulty understanding what principles psychoanalysis
  uses to support its conception of desire, when it maintains that
  the libido must be desexualised or even sublimated in order to
  proceed to the social investments, and inversely that the libido
  only resexualises these investments during the course of patho-
  logical regression. (AO, 322/348)

    The problem here is twofold: psychoanalysis cannot account for
'the satisfaction the handyman [bricoleur] experiences when he plugs
something into an electrical socket' (AO, 8/13) except in sexual
terms, which it rules out; nor can it see the sexuality evident in the
peculiar pleasure the bureaucrat takes in creating a well-ordered universe of files and reports, spreadsheets and databases, that he creates
for himself, except as a perversion. Could we not say the same thing
of countless other routine or mundane activities with which we fill
our days? What is the pleasure of sitting on a beach on a hot day? Is
it the hot white sand between our toes, the stinging sweat in our eyes,
the burning sun on our back or the cool blue water before us beckoning us to explore its mysterious depths? What keeps us going back
to the beach day after day, year after year? Maybe it's the combined
voyeuristic and exhibitionistic thrill of being able to look at and be
seen by other semi-clad people - the browned, the reddened, and the
glistening, oily, sandy bodies, spread-eagled in the sand like so many
chimeras. But if so, why not stay at home in the air-conditioning and
watch a porno or re-runs of Baywatch! What specifically is it about
the beach that draws us there so compellingly? By the same token,
why doesn't everyone feel the same way? How can another loathe
what I love? The pleasure of the beach has indeed been described in

                                  46

                           READING THE TEXT

terms of transgression and the violating of taboos - but despite the
resonances such analyses are able to generate, ultimately they fail to
answer one basic question: why the beach? Doubtless the analyses of
transgression are true on one level, but the symbolic overcoding it
relies on tells us nothing about the simpler pleasure 'insisting'
beneath these conscious thrills in the unconscious and the preconscious - the feel of the sand, the sun, the water. This 'insistence' of
desire is ultimately what Deleuze and Guattari are trying to account
for with the concept of the desiring-machine. We could of course
spin out countless other examples and questions.

   The truth is that sexuality is everywhere: the way a bureaucrat
   fondles his records, a judge administers justice, a businessman
   causes money to circulate; the way the bourgeoisie fucks the pro-
   letariat; and so on. And there is no need to resort to metaphors,
   any more than for the libido to go by way of metamorphoses.
   Hitler got the fascists sexually aroused. Flags, nations, armies,
   banks get a lot of people aroused. (AO, 322/348)

   The shift in perspective palpable here is more far-reaching than
meets the eye. It necessitates a complete change in how desire is conceptualized, not just by psychoanalysis, but virtually the whole of
the Western philosophical tradition to this point. Deleuze and
Guattari repolarize it around an affirmative notion of production,
setting aside the standard negative notion of desire as lack or need.
On Deleuze and Guattari's view of things, desire does not need to be
stimulated by an exogenous force such as need or want, it is a stimulus in its own right. This brings us to the key proposition advanced
by this chapter, which as we'll see in more detail in the discussion of
the fourth chapter of Anti-Oedipus is in fact one of the four principal theses of schizoanalysis: Deleuze and Guattari propose that
every investment of desire is social.

   We maintain that the social field is immediately invested by desire,
   that it is the historically determined product of desire, and that
   libido has no need of any mediation or sublimation, any psychic
   operation, any transformation, in order to invade and invest the
   productive forces and the relations of production. There is only
   desire and the social, and nothing else. (AO, 31/36 emphasis in
   original)

                                  47

                 DELEUZE AND GVXTTWS ANTI-OEDIPUS

They mean this to be understood in two ways. First, against the
orthodoxy of psychoanalysis, it means desire invests the social field
directly and without need of the mediation of fantasy (power
doesn't excite us because it reminds us of our father, but because it
resonates with the productivity of the unconscious itself). Second,
against the orthodoxy of Marxism, it means that desire has no need
of the deceptions of ideology in order to invest the social. We'll
examine these points in more detail in the discussion of chapter two,
but suffice it to say for now that Deleuze and Guattari's theory of
desire implies a model of the unconscious which exerts far greater
influence on the subject, yet also has far more psychical independence than either psychoanalysis or Marxism allow for. This isn't to
say that they don't consider either the actuality or possibility of
either psychic repression or social repression because in fact they
do - indeed, one must say repression plays a far greater role in their
work than their liberatory rhetoric would seem to allow.

  To a certain degree the traditional logic of desire is all wrong from
  the outset: from the very first step that the Platonic logic of desire
  forces us to take, making us choose between production and acqui-
  sition. From the moment we place desire on the side of the acqui-
  sition, we make desire an idealistic (dialectical, nihilistic)
  conception, which causes us to look upon it primarily as a lack:
  a lack of an object, a lack of the real object. (AO, 26/32)

The other path, the path of 'production', makes desire a process,
something we do. By making desire lack we effectively subordinate
it to another process, namely need, and make that its support,
because if we only desire what we lack then we would still have to
explain how it came to be that we were lacking that thing. Obviously,
in doing so, we sacrifice the process of desire qua desire and turn it
into a second-order concept. By contrast, Deleuze and Guattari
argue that desire isn't 'bolstered by needs, but rather the contrary;
needs are derived from desire: they are counterproducts within the
real that desire produces.' (AO, 28/34). It is true the path of 'production' hasn't been completely ignored by philosophy. They credit
Kant's Critique of Judgement with inaugurating something of 'a critical revolution as regards the theory of desire' (AO, 26-7/32). But,
they add, it is no coincidence that Kant illustrates this definition
of desire with fancies, hallucinations and delusions. In other words,

                                  48

                            READING THE TEXT

for Kant the power of the mind to produce its own object means
that the

  reality of the object, insofar as it is produced by desire, is thus a
  psychic reality. Hence it can be said that Kant's critical revolution
  changes nothing essential: this way of conceiving of productivity
  does not question the validity of the classical conception of desire
  as a lack; rather, it uses this conception as a support and a but-
  tress, and merely examines it more carefully. (AO, 27/32)

Following the same logic, Deleuze and Guattari go on to say that
desire conceived as the production of fantasies, which is the imagined compensation and substitute for the real object has 'been
explained perfectly by psychoanalysis' (AO, 27/33). But, they imply,
psychoanalysis has totally misunderstood desire's actual function,
which is not at all the production of fantasies, which is merely a secondary operation, but the production of production itself.

   There is no such thing as the social production of reality on the
   one hand, and a desiring-production that is mere fantasy on the
   other. The only connections that could be established between
   these two productions would be the secondary ones of introjec-
   tion and projection, as though all social practices had their
   precise counterpart in introjected or internal mental practices, or
   as though mental practices were projected upon social systems,
   without either of the two sets of practices ever having any real or
   concrete effect upon the other. (AO, 30/36)

Thus we return to the problem of desiring-production. It is true, as
I'll discuss more fully below, desiring-production cannot operate
without simultaneously producing new desiring-machines and
destroying old desiring-machines, but that doesn't mean they are
desiring-production and desiring-machines indistinguishable from
each other as in the proverbial case of the night when all cows are
black. They are both an essential part of what Deleuze and Guattari
refer to as the process of desire, each with quite different roles to play.
As I've said, Anti-Oedipus opens with three purposely off-the-wall
snapshots of desiring-machines in full flight, implying that these be
given primacy, but in the true conceptual order of things it is in fact
desiring-production that is the primary term. This point has to be

                                    49

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S4/V77-OED/Pl/S

insisted on because Deleuze and Guattari's rather delirious presentation of desiring-machines in their schizophrenic mode in these
opening pages can have a blinkering effect: first of all, it makes it
seem as though this is the only way desiring-machines can be formed,
which is not the case (as Deleuze and Guattari themselves acknowledge there are also desiring-machines of a paranoid or perverted
type too); second, and equally problematically, it makes it seem that
desiring-machines of this type are in and of themselves desirable,
which again is not the case (Deleuze and Guattari acknowledge that
the schizophrenic in full flight is bereft of all the usual social ties and
is therefore not the model of a revolutionary); and third, perhaps
most insidiously of all, it obscures the relation between desiringproduction and desiring-machines, which is by no means as straightforward as it initially appears (as we shall see, there are several
modalities of desiring-production). So what is desiring-production?
Putting it in psychoanalytic terms, it is the production of the Real in
itself, or better yet it is the Real conceived as process rather than
unreachable limit - it is not so much unrepresentable (Lacan's thesis)
as non-representational (AO, 59/61). Putting it in schizoanalytic
terms, the Real 'is the end product, the result of the passive syntheses of desire as the autoproduction of the unconscious' (AO, 28/34).

                    The passive syntheses of desire

   The great discovery of psychoanalysis was that of the production
   of desire, of the productions of the unconscious. (AO, 25/31)

The productive unconscious - i.e., desire or desiring-production - is
a synthesizing machine, a factory, but the syntheses it performs are
neither all of the same type, nor all of the same order. Moreover it
is double in character: it has both a nature and regime. Its nature is
what it is capable of, what it can do, its competence if you will; while
its regime is what it does when it is doing what it is capable of, its performance in other words. The productive unconscious, then, in all its
guises as desire and desiring-production, terms Deleuze and
Guattari use interchangeably, is 'the set of passive syntheses that
engineer partial objects, flows, and bodies, and that function as units
of production' (i.e., the desiring-machines and their objects) (AO,
28/34). As I will explain in more detail in what follows, the concept
of passive synthesis and with it the schizoanalytic apparatus as a

                                    50

                           READING THE TEXT

whole rests on the philosophical foundation Deleuze put in place in
Difference and Repetition, particularly his magnificent conceptualization of the three syntheses of time: habit, memory and death.7
   Passive synthesis combines three distinct kinds of operation, which
taken together comprise the three modes of desire understood as a
machine: (i) the synthesis of connection, (ii) the synthesis of disjunction, and (iii) the synthesis of conjunction. As I will discuss in more
detail in relation to chapter 2, each of these three types of synthesis
may go one of two ways, according to which type of regime is in ascendancy. This variation in what may be termed the modality of the syntheses is the principle analytic mechanism constructed by Deleuze and
Guattari to explain contemporary social and political behaviour and
attitudes. It is this mechanism which enables the notions of desiringproduction and desiring-machines to be used for analytic purposes.
My implication is that passive syntheses form the analytic backbone
of Anti-Oedipus - they give rise to the basic concept of the desiringmachines as well as the means of establishing an effective connection
between psychoanalysis and Marxism, or more particularly individual desire and social control. This mechanism is the principal subject
of chapter 2 of Anti-Oedipus. Here, then, I will briefly explore the
origin and derivation of the concept of passive synthesis as it was
developed in Deleuze's work prior to his meeting with Guattari.
   I will start with the big picture - the notion of passive synthesis
itself - and then move onto the specifics of how its individual parts
function. Essentially, what I want to establish to begin with is that
although Deleuze and Guattari rarely use the term 'passive synthesis' apart from the one mention cited above (which probably explains
why very few of their commentators have latched onto it), without
it we cannot explain what desire is, we can only say what it does, and
even then we are restricted to sheer description.8 It is only with the
concept of passive synthesis in place that desire becomes an analytic
concept, a concept capable of generating concrete social and political critique. Contrary to Peter Hallward, who pays very little attention to the role of passive synthesis in Deleuze's work, in spite of his
obsessive cavilling against the latter's 'constructivism', passive synthesis is perfectly able to account for 'cumulative transformation or
novelty in terms of actual materials and tendencies'.9 Indeed, I
would go so far as to say that // is only with the aid of the concept of
passive synthesis that one can accomplish this task without falling
into the very idealism of which Hallward accuses Deleuze. Passive

                                   51

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S/W77-OED/PUS

synthesis is Deleuze's means of solving the problem of constructing
a genuine philosophy of immanence without at the same time losing
his grip on the 'real world'.
   The basic problem facing the philosophy of immanence is this:
how can the mind constitute itself without first of all having an idea
of itself?10 The answer is that it cannot do so unless, as both the
Kantian and Hegelian traditions do, it first of all posits a prior and
necessarily higher category capable of comprehending it, such as the
Mind or the Spirit. Deleuze's solution, which goes in the reverse
direction to Kant and Hegel, is to posit at a foundational level a set
of passive syntheses that are constitutive without being active. These
syntheses have no self-comprehension of what they are doing, much
less an end or goal - they simply act, as unthinkingly as machines.11
There is a necessary circularity here: the syntheses produce everything, even themselves. Chaos, Deleuze's definition of nothingness,
is the passive syntheses turning in a void, ceaselessly operating, but
not producing anything.
   In Difference and Repetition, Deleuze defines passive synthesis as
follows: 'It is not carried out by the mind, but occurs in the mind which
contemplates, prior to all memory and all reflection.' (DR, 71/97). This
is the schizo process avant la lettre. This is desiring-production avant
la lettre. As Deleuze and Guattari formulate it, then, the question 'how
does desire work?' is effectively the same question as 'how does the
unconscious come into being?' Both questions turn on essentially the
same problem, namely the autoproduction of the Real. 'Following
Condillac', Deleuze writes, 'we must regard habit as the foundation
from which all other psychic phenomena derive.' (DR, 78/107). The
passive synthesis of habit 'constitutes the habit of living, our expectation that "it" will continue'. (DR, 74/101). Habits are the 'presents'
(moments of pure lived time) the imagination seizes from the flow of
time, without ever ceasing to be temporal. Passive synthesis, then, is
not just a capacity to receive sensation, as Kant might have it, but
implies a synthetic ability to constitute the sensate organism as well.
   There are two levels of habit, or what Deleuze also calls 'constituent passivity': organic synthesis and perceptual synthesis. In both
cases, though, habit is used in a pre-subjective sense. It doesn't refer
to the habits, good or bad, of a fully formed subject, like smoking, or
reading the Sunday papers in bed. It is not something T do. It belongs
rather to the order of the formation of the organism itself, at its most
elementary. The capacity to contract a habit is in this respect the most

                                   52

                            READING THE TEXT

basic prerequisite of the organism. Habit is a mode of contraction.
Contraction for Deleuze is the synthetic basis of all life forms,
describing literally how they come into being. At the level of organic
synthesis: 'We are made of contracted water, earth, light and air - not
merely prior to recognition or representation of these, but prior to
their being sensed. Every organism, in its receptive and perceptual
elements, but also in its viscera, is a sum of contractions, of retentions
and expectations.' (DR, 73/100). Contraction is contemplation, or
rather it is what one does in contemplating - but we must not think
the 'one' here implies a conscious human subject because even wheat
can be considered a contraction of earth, air and soil. A soul must be
attributed to the heart, to the muscles, nerves and cells, but a contemplative soul whose entire function is to contract a habit.' (DR,
74/101). Contraction is the dual process of selecting what is good and
needful from the environment and setting aside everything else as
either superfluous or poisonous. Perceptual synthesis works in exactly
the same way and always in concert with organic synthesis as shown
by von Uexkiill's celebrated analysis of the tick, with its three affects:
sensitivity to light, sense of smell, penetrating mouth (ATP, 283/314).
   As Deleuze himself acknowledges, many people will not recognize
the foregoing as belonging to the order of habit because there
doesn't seem to be any action or activity in the processes related to
contraction. This owes, he says, to a psychological illusion and a
fetish for activity which misunderstands the very process of learning
itself because it fails to grasp that contemplation is not the activity
of a self, but the passive synthesis of what we mistake for a self.
Deleuze rejects the a priori assumption that the self is an integrated
global whole (the psychoanalytic theory of the fractured subject is
in his view a complicated variant on this assumption). He takes the
view, rather, that behind the fagade of

   the self which acts are little selves which contemplate and which
   render possible both the action and the active subject. We speak
   of our 'self only in virtue of these thousands of little witnesses
   which contemplate within us: it is always a third party who says
   'me'. (DR, 75/103)

Although Deleuze often refers to these thousands of little witnesses
as partial objects, they are neither the bereft fragments of a shattered
unity nor the scattered pieces of an as yet unassembled puzzle.

                                    53

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S/W77-OED/P17S

   Selves are larval subjects; the world of passive syntheses consti-
   tutes the system of the self, under conditions yet to be deter-
   mined, but it is the system of a dissolved self. There is a self
   wherever a furtive contemplation has been established, whenever
   a contracting machine capable of drawing a difference from rep-
   etition functions somewhere. (DR, 78-9/107)

The contracting machine Deleuze speaks of here would in due course
be rechristened 'desiring-production' and the larval selves it gives rise
to 'desiring-machines'. In short, practically the entire theoretical
apparatus underpinning Anti-Oedipus and subsequent volumes is
worked out here in detail.

                           The three syntheses
The three passive syntheses are as follows:

   1. Connective Synthesis - mobilizes the Libido as withdrawal energy
      (energie de prelevemenf)
   2. Disjunctive Synthesis - mobilizes the Numen as detachment energy
      (energie de detachemeni)
   3. Conjunctive Synthesis - mobilizes Voluptas as residual energy (energie
      de residuelle)

Marx's general formula of capital (MCM') provides the underpinning model (or 'metamodel' as Guattari would term it) for these syntheses, both individually and in relation to each (AO, 4/9-10). This
model describes the basic working of the unconscious as Deleuze
and Guattari see it.
   Giovanni Arrighi helpfully exfoliates Marx's famous formula as
follows: 'Money capital (M) means liquidity, flexibility, freedom of
choice. Commodity capital (C) means capital invested in a particular input-output combination in view of a profit. Hence it means
concreteness, rigidity, and a narrowing down or closing of options.
M' means expanded liquidity, flexibility, and freedom of choice.'12
The crucial historical point here is that capitalists do not invest in
'particular input-output combinations' as an end in itself, but do so
with a view to obtaining even greater flexibility of investment, and
in times of trouble will always tend to retreat to a position of flexibility. More generally, what this means is that capitalists do not

                                    54

                          READING THE TEXT

invest in relatively risky and inflexible investments such as manufacturing plants for the sake of it, but do so with a view to enhancing
their base of capital so as to increase their overall liquidity and the
flexibility that results.13

   Marx's general formula of capital (MCM') can therefore be inter-
   preted as depicting not just the logic of individual capitalist
   investments, but also a recurrent pattern of historical capitalism
   as a world system. The central aspect of this pattern is the alter-
   nation of epochs of material expansion (MC phases of capital
   accumulation) with phases of financial rebirth and expansion
   (CM').14

In the first phase, money capital 'sets in motion' a vast range of
activities, but centres principally on converting raw materials into
finished commodities, and derives its impetus to growth from the
sale of these manufactured objects. In the second phase, however,
this money capital, having achieved a critical mass, basically 'sets
itself free' from its dependency on objects and expands through
exclusively financial deals in banking, insurance, derivatives, bond
trading and lately the exploitation of intellectual property.
   The three syntheses of desire correspond to the three phases in
Marx's general formula of capital, namely MCM': the synthesis of
connection is the Tree labour' or 'primitive accumulation' phase that
sets everything in motion; the synthesis of disjunction corresponds
to the intermediate phase of investment in industry (input-output
combinations); and the synthesis of conjunction is the third phase
in which money capital is set free all over again. This model is,
however, very far from describing a steady-state system. It is subject
to a law of declining rate of profit as the market reaches saturation
point and capital itself attains such a bloated size it can no longer
continue to expand at the same rate. This is the position of corporations like Microsoft who having attained not only a near monopoly
in the software market but a virtual saturation of it as well (something like 98 per cent of all computers in the world use a Microsoft
operating system) can no longer continue to grow by selling software
to new customers; it must either diversify into new lines such as the
internet and compete with the all-conquering Google, or cannibalize its own customer base by releasing new operating systems that
are not back-compatible with the existing systems. But this really

                                  55

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

only refers to what Arrighi designates as the MC phase of capital
accumulation. The second CM' phase can only be seen by stepping
outside of the confines of Microsoft and looking at the software
industry as a whole. The fact that it is reported in the business press
that investors are growing nervous about Microsoft's capacity to lift
itself out of its current crisis of accumulation suggests that capital
is getting ready to take flight from this corporation and start looking
for new ways of setting things in motion all over again (hence, no
doubt, its merger talks with Yahoo). It could be that Microsoft is
coming up against its own immanent limit, the point past which it
cannot grow.
   Viewed from the perspective of the software industry as a whole,
it is clear that capital is following Marx's formula to the letter.
Venture capital - the free flowing money that results from primitive
accumulation - seeks out 'particular input-output combinations' in
the form of dot.com start-ups in the expectation of being rapidly
converted back into venture capital so the process can be resumed
all over again elsewhere. As Marx himself emphasized, and Deleuze
and Guattari reiterate, this process contains a double movement -
on the one hand, it creates new investment opportunities by breaking with convention and entering new territory, which in the early
1990s the internet was (deterritorialization); but on the other hand,
as these opportunities peter out and returns dwindle it falls back on
tradition and resurrects images of the past in an attempt to maintain
momentum (reterritorialization). This is precisely what is happening
with the internet now: recent market trends suggest that the dot.com
business has lately moved out of the MC phase and entered the terminal CM' phase. Although new internet business applications are
springing up all the time, and the market is so far maintaining its
faith in them, it is hard to avoid the glaring fact that the general tendency of these businesses is to follow old, established patterns of
profit making. There is a distinct staleness in their thinking that their
technological wizardry cannot disguise. After all, eBay is simply a
global fleamarket and Amazon a global bazaar, business models
which date back to ancient times.
   New applications of technology are not matched by new ways of
generating surplus value. For all its innovation in establishing the
search-engine as a 'model of realization' (Deleuze and Guattari's
term for what the financial press calls a 'business model'), it ultimately relies on the idea of paid advertising pioneered by newspapers

                                   56

                           READING THE TEXT

in the nineteenth century. More striking still, the current
Wunderkinder of the internet, Myspace and Youtube, are yet to
realize a profit from their actual business activities - they are trading
on their 'cultural' value, using our interest in the service they provide
to counteract the real fact of their loss-making and render themselves valuable to other corporations. In this way, canny investors in
these start-up corporations have been able to make a substantial
profit from profitless ventures simply by selling them to larger media
corporations (Google and Fox respectively), thus confirming the
general point that in the third M' phase money simply begets money
without the necessity of a mediation through commodity production. In other words, the limit Microsoft faces is not the same as the
one capital as a whole faces - it can always move on. By deserting
unprofitable investments in favour of lucrative opportunities elsewhere, capital itself thrives even when individual companies - even
giant companies like Microsoft - do not.15
    The unconscious as Deleuze and Guattari conceive it is subject to
these same laws, these same processes, these same cyclical turns in
production. To begin with, there is the synthesis of connection, also
known as 'the production of production', which sets everything in
motion by coupling continuous flows of libido with partial objects
that interrupt the flow and draw sustenance from it. 'Desire causes
the current to flow, itself flows in turn, and breaks the flow.' (AO,
6/11). The assemblage of milk-producing breast and the sucklingmouth is Deleuze and Guattari's standard image for this process, but
it is a deceptive image because it obfuscates the fact that the synthesis of connection is an abstract process which can be found literally
everywhere. In spite of the emphasis Deleuze and Guattari give to
bodily functions and bodily fluids - shitting, fucking, etc. - we will
never understand the concept of synthesis unless we realize that it is
fundamentally virtual in nature. The same must be said for desiringmachines - the breast and mouth may be the component parts of a
particular desiring-machine, but it is the relationship between them
that is machinic not the respective body parts.
    Even though the synthesis of connection refers to actual connections between real flows and real objects, actual breasts and actual
mouths, it isn't itself actual. Though fully real, its mode of being is
entirely virtual. For our purposes, it is entrepreneurial capitalism that
gives us the best sense of how the synthesis of connection (along with
the parallel syntheses of disjunction and conjunction), works in real

                                   57

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

terms. As I mentioned above, the synthesis of connection corresponds
to what Marx referred to as 'primitive accumulation', the process
whereby money and commodities are transformed into capital. This
can only occur under special conditions, Marx says, namely the
moment when two very different types of commodity owners - the
owners of the means of production and the owners of labour, the socalled 'free' workers who are neither part of the means of production
(as slaves would be), nor owners of the means of production (as selfemployed peasant proprietors would be) - meet and form a productive relationship. 'So-called primitive accumulation, therefore, is
nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer
["free" labour] from the means of production. It appears as "primitive" because it forms the pre-history of capital, and of the mode of
production corresponding to capital.'16 This history, Marx adds, 'is
written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and fire'.17

Synthesis of connection
The synthesis of connection is the process whereby desire exploits
the body to its own ends. In this scenario, desire is the equivalent of
capital: it owns the means of production, but lacks the labourers
needed to realize its potential. In order to obtain the labour it needed
to staff its mines, factories, agribusinesses, and so forth, capital
had to first of all 'free' it from the various social bonds of the soil
and the guild and thereby transform peasants and journeymen into
wage-labourers. As Marx notes, to the bourgeois historian this
process appears emancipatory, but this is only true to the extent that
we also observe that these workers were simultaneously 'robbed of
all their own means of production, and all the guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal arrangements'.18 Following Lacan,
but clearly in sympathy with Marx, Deleuze and Guattari refer to
this process of desire as the procurement phase: desire follows the
same path as primitive accumulation, it first of all disjoints the body
into its component organs (i.e., it breaks up the feudal arrangements
tying labour to the land or the guild) and then sheers these parts
from their own powers (i.e., it alienates their labour) (AO, 44/49). As
Marx puts it, capital pays for the power of individual labourers, but
not their combined power.19 Having taken control of the organs it
then reorganizes them to suit its needs - thus the labourer's muscle
power is harnessed to the machine, and its movements subordinated
to its rhythm.

                                   58

                            READING THE TEXT

   This is what Deleuze and Guattari mean when they say the
desiring-machines try to make us into organisms - the synthesis of
connection snaps our organs together in a new arrangement of its
own making and its own design. On this view of things, organs are
any parts of the body which seen from the perspective of the unconscious are capable of performing labour, capable in other words of
producing a flow themselves, but also of turning the ceaseless flow
of libido into an affect (i.e., 'cathexis' in Freud's terms), that is to say
both an interruption and conversion of desire. These parts, the
organs, are the equivalent of free labour inasmuch as their productivity is henceforth in the service of another party, namely capital
itself. This labour is productive in Marx's sense because it advances
the objectives of capital itself by producing surplus value. This is
why Deleuze and Guattari say that producing is always something
'grafted onto' the object, namely the organs (AO, 6/12). The essential point here is that primitive accumulation gives rise to something
greater than itself: not merely capital, but the capitalist class itself,
henceforth the new rulers of the earth.

   This is the body that Marx is referring to when he says that it is
   not the product of labour, but rather appears as its natural or
   divine presupposition. In fact, it does not restrict itself merely to
   opposing productive forces in and of themselves. It falls back on
   (// se rabat sur) all production, constituting a surface over which
   the forces and agents of production are distributed, thereby
   appropriating for itself all surplus production and arrogating to
   itself both the whole and the parts of the process, which now
   seem to emanate from it as a quasi cause. Forces and agents come
   to represent a miraculous form of its own power: they appear
   'miraculated' (miracules) by it. (AO, 11/16)

This brings us to the second synthesis, the synthesis of disjunction,
or separation phase.

Synthesis of disjunction
The synthesis of disjunction operates on the platform created by
primitive accumulation, which Deleuze and Guattari refer to as the
body without organs. Its basic model is that of the binary distinction - rich and poor, brave and cowardly, straight and gay, and so
on. Its energy, which Deleuze and Guattari define as divine, comes

                                     59

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

from its connection to the body without organs, which might usefully be regarded as its dialectical complement.

  The body without organs is produced as a whole, but in its own
  particular place within the process of production, alongside the
  parts that it neither unifies nor totalises. And when it operates on
  them, when it turns back upon them (se rabat sur elks), it brings
  about transverse communications, transfinite summarisations,
  polyvocal and transcursive inscriptions on its own surface, on
  which the functional breaks of partial objects are continually
  intersected by breaks in signifying chains, and by breaks effected
  by a subject that uses them as reference points in order to locate
  itself. The whole not only coexists with all the parts; it is contigu-
  ous to them, it exists as a product that is produced apart from
  them and yet at the same time is related to them. (AO, 47/51-2)

   Translating this back into economic theory, what Deleuze and
Guattari are effectively saying is that the process of primitive accumulation produces as a by-product something not only greater than
itself, but something that ultimately triumphs over it, arrogating to
itself all of the latter's productive power. As Marx argued, capital
soaks up the productive power of its workers and represents it back
to them as its own power. 'On entering the labour process' the socalled free workers (i.e., the syntheses of connection)

   are incorporated into capital [i.e., the body without organs]. As
   co-operators, as members of a working organism, they merely
   form a particular mode of existence of capital. Hence the pro-
   ductive power developed by the worker socially is the productive
   power of capital. The socially productive power of labour devel-
   ops as a free gift to capital whenever the workers are placed under
   certain conditions, and it is capital which places them under these
   conditions. Because this power costs capital nothing, while on the
   other hand it is not developed by the worker until his labour itself
   belongs to capital, it appears as a power which capital possesses
   by its nature - a productive power inherent in capital.20

  The term 'the body without organs' is borrowed from Antonin
Artaud, but it is in vain that we look to his work for an explanation
of what Deleuze and Guattari have in mind. Marx is a far better

                                  60

                            READING THE TEXT

guide. The synthesis of disjunction corresponds to the C phase when
capital (body without organs) invests directly in 'input-output
combinations' (desiring-machines). As Arrighi indicates above, this
phase is marked by a tension. The aim of capital is to increase its liquidity, to do this it risks investing in fixed situations, but the minute
these investments perform contrary to expectations it retreats to its
preferred liquid form. In Deleuze and Guattari's work this dualism
is rewritten as the attraction/repulsion relation between the body
without organs (capital in its liquid state) and the desiring-machines
(capital in its invested and bound state). The synthesis of disjunction
is in effect the genealogy of desire, or rather 'the form that the genealogy of desire assumes' (AO, 15/20).
    The syntheses of disjunction are the means whereby the 'subject'
differentiates itself from sheer matter and indeed from the smooth
surface of the body without organs on which it stands. It takes the
form of an 'either/or'judgement: am I parent or child? alive or dead?
man or woman? (the neurotic's three questions, according to Lacan).
But perhaps we could put it another way, more in keeping with the
economic model we have been following. The essential question
of the capitalist is always 'will it make a profit or not?' In other words,
it is not simply a matter of deciding between being a parent or child,
alive or dead, or even man or woman, but of determining the surplus
value that will accrue to me for deciding correctly. It is in this sense
functionally equivalent to the Althusserian concept of 'interpellation', with the body without organs standing in the place of ideology.
For what do the ideological state apparatuses (i.e., social-machines)
do but call on us to reproduce the relations of production!21

   The disjunctive synthesis of recording therefore comes to overlap
   the connective syntheses of production. The process as process of
   production extends into the method as method of inscription. Or
   rather, if what we term libido is the connective 'labour' of desiring-
   production, it should be said that part of this energy is transformed
   into the energy of disjunctive inscription (Numen). (AO, 14/19)

Undoubtedly, it is Althusser who has given us the best description
of this state of affairs.

   As St Paul admirably put it, it is in the 'Logos', meaning in ideol-
   ogy [i.e., the body without organs], that we 'live, move and have our

                                    61

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S XW77-OED/PUS

   being'. It follows that, for you and for me, the category of the
   subject is a primary 'obviousness' (obviousnesses are always
   primary): it is clear that you and I are subjects (free, ethical,
   etc. . . .). Like all obviousnesses, including those that make a word
   'name a thing' or 'have a meaning' (therefore including the obvi-
   ousness of the 'transparency' of language), the 'obviousness' that
   you and I are subjects - and that that does not cause any prob-
   lems - is an ideological effect, the elementary ideological effect. It
   is indeed a peculiarity of ideology that it imposes (without appear-
   ing to do so, since these are 'obviousnesses') obviousnesses as obvi-
   ousnesses, which we cannot fail to recognise and before which we
   have the inevitable and natural reaction of crying out (aloud or in
   the 'still, small voice of conscience'): That's obvious! That's right!
   That's true!'22

It is this effect - the creation and occupation of what we might term
the plane or power of obviousness - that Deleuze and Guattari have
in mind when they say given a certain effect we should inquire what
machine is capable of producing it (AO, 3/8).
   The true ideological power of capital is that it is able to portray
itself, and not the sweat of labour that enabled it to come into being
in the first place, as the real enabling force in contemporary society.
Nowhere is this reversal of the actual order of things more starkly
expressed than in the egregious neo-liberal idea of the 'trickle-down
effect', which alleges that promoting 'big business' by giving it generous tax breaks or indeed 'tax holidays' is good for society as a
whole because when 'big business' succeeds its prosperity must
inevitably be distributed downwards in the form of increased consumer spending on the part of the rich. The same logic applies in
Nobel Prize winner Hernando de Soto's bootstrapping model of
economic development (expounded in the aptly named The Mystery
of Capital), which proposes that the Third World can raise itself out
of its poverty if it simply lowers the barriers to the wonderworking
properties of capital by giving slum dwellers two things: land titles
and access to micro credit. The trouble is, de Soto's policy ideas do
not work for the general good of all, but in Mike Davis's memorable
phrase 'simply grease the skids to a Hobbesian hell'.23
   In practice, land titling in the slums leads to the creation of a
slum-dwelling rentier class who use their freely acquired title to
extort rent from the ceaseless influx of new residents who by virtue

                                   62

                           READING THE TEXT

of the historical accident of arriving too late to receive the benefit of
state's munificence must make do with what the market offers. In
other words, land titling 'accelerates social differentiation in the
slum and does nothing to aid renters, the actual majority of the poor
in many cities'.24 In turn, the newly created landholding class act as
bankers to the renting class, thus acerbating an already desperate
situation. The point is that there is nothing mysterious about capital,
except the fact that as a society we tolerate its invidious effects.
The body without organs, then, is simply not capital, but the
acceptance of it as a model of right in Hegel's sense. Social
differentiation, which presupposes the existence of capital, is indeed
a perfect example of the synthesis of disjunction at work. This synthesis, which Deleuze and Guattari also refer to as a synthesis of
recording, does not operate in the same way as the synthesis of connection; it expresses a law of distribution or inscription rather than
combination or production. Its law is the law of what Zizek usefully
calls the 'forced choice'.25 For instance, de Soto tells the impoverished slum-dwellers that capitalism isn't the cause of their problems,
but the cure. His message is clear: choose capitalism and you will be
saved, not because it is the best available choice of economic models,
but rather because there is no other choice. Slums exist, according to
this viewpoint, because capital's principal mechanisms, private
property and credit money, have been forestalled by short sighted
policy making on the part of the state. But it is an easy and cheap
fix - the state can use its power to legislate title into being and
effectively grant slum-dwellers their property and then sit back and
let the market take care of the rest. Either we acknowledge that
capital is the only true economic model, or we condemn ourselves to
a permanent state of poverty. The only way to break this deadlock,
Deleuze and Guattari insist, is by jettisoning both the problem and
the solution.

Synthesis of conjunction
Acceding to capitalism as a form of right has its rewards. Even in the
slums, among the very poor, there are those who benefit from
capital, however meagrely.

   Just as a part of the libido as energy of production was trans-
   formed into energy of recording (Numen), a part of this energy of
   recording is transformed into energy of consummation (Voluptas).

                                   63

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4/V7Y-OED/PUS

   It is this residual energy that is the motive force behind the third
   synthesis of the unconscious: the conjunctive synthesis'so it's. . .',
   or the production of consumption. (AO, 18/23)

The synthesis of conjunction takes place under the aegis of the previous two syntheses; it is the reward that falls to 'us' for assenting to
an interpellation by the desiring-machines (all while forgetting that a
choice was involved). Its model is clearly that of 'misrecognition',
which as Althusser put it 'is of particular concern for all investigations
into ideology'.26 But whereas Althusser effectively conflates misrecognition with ideology, Deleuze and Guattari treat it as a product
of the interaction between the body without organs and the desiringmachines. The subject suffers from the tension between the two states
of desire - free andfixed- produced by the syntheses of connection
and disjunction and unconsciously tries to reconcile this tension
through the production of still another kind of machine, which the
generic name 'celibate machine' may provisionally designate.

   This is tantamount to saying that the subject is produced as a
   mere residuum alongside the desiring-machines, or that he con-
   fuses himself with this third productive machine and with the
   residual reconciliation that it brings about: a conjunctive synthe-
   sis of consummation in the form of a wonderstruck 'So that's
   what it was!'(AO, 19/23)

This tension is the basis of Deleuze and Guattari's explanation of
what in Freud would be termed symptom formation.

       PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALISM: THE HOLY FAMILY

  Given the syntheses of the unconscious, the practical problem is that
  of their use, legitimate or not, and of the conditions that define a use
  of synthesis as legitimate or not.
                         Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus

If I were to try to represent chapter 2 of Anti-Oedipus pictorially, I'd
have to resort to one of those trompe Voeil pictures of the type which
depending on how you look at them show either a duck or rabbit, a
wineglass or two people kissing, and so on, because it is effectively two chapters morphed into one. On the one hand there is a

                                     64

                           READING THE TEXT

lengthy critique of the paralogisms of psychoanalysis and on the
other hand there is the further elaboration of what I described with
regard to the previous chapter as the analytic mechanism of schizoanalysis. Most readings of Anti-Oedipus emphasize the former, often
at the expense of the latter. My approach will be more even-handed,
but having said that my argument throughout is that to read AntiOedipus effectively we need to focus on the analytic mechanism it
develops.
   The fact is, Deleuze and Guattari do not reject psychoanalysis.
This is a common misperception they themselves are largely responsible for. Contrary to popular myth, they explicitly state that they
'refuse to play "take it or leave it"' games with psychoanalysis and
accept the edict that 'one cannot challenge the process of the "cure"
except by starting from elements drawn from this cure.'27 (AO,
 128/140). In practice, they actually retain a number of psychoanalytic concepts (such as primary and secondary repression, the ego,
the drives, as well as the concept of the unconscious itself as a distinct system within a system that also includes a preconscious and a
conscious) and use them with only minimal retooling. Their stated
aim is to engender what they term an 'internal reversal' in psychoanalysis and transform its 'analytic machine into an indispensable
part of the revolutionary machinery' (AO, 90/97). The surprisingly
Maoist implication of this aim is that social change can only be
achieved via a 'cultural revolution', that is to say a revolution in the
way people think rather than a revolution of arms. In other words,
the critique of psychoanalysis advances the cause of schizoanalysis,
but it is very far from being the main purpose of either this chapter
or the book as a whole.

                The five paralogisms of psychoanalysis

As we read Deleuze and Guattari's critique of psychoanalysis, the
question we need to keep uppermost in our minds is how do they
propose to bring about the 'internal reversal' that will transform it
into an indispensable component of a revolutionary programme?
This goal, rather than the desire to refute psychoanalysis tout court,
governs their approach to the work of Freud and his successors.
Deleuze and Guattari identify five paralogisms (that is to say,
five points of argument which are unintentionally or unknowingly
invalid or false) in the practice of psychoanalysis. The paralogisms of:

                                  65

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

  1. extrapolation;
  2. double bind;
  3. application;
  4. fictitious desire;
  5. desiring-production.

The first three paralogisms are enumerated in the course of the
explanation of the three passive syntheses and are in that sense
corollaries of the respective syntheses. The fourth paralogism,
arguably the most important of them all, provides a partial or preliminary explanation of how Oedipalization takes hold of the
unconscious. The fifth paralogism brings us back full circle to where
we began, namely the idea that desiring-production as an affirmative
process defines the operation of the unconscious, not lack. What in
all this the promised mechanism of 'internal reversal'? The short
answer is the family. As will be seen below in the discussion of the
individual paralogisms, Deleuze and Guattari reject psychoanalysis's apprehension of the family and propose four counter-theses:

  1. the family is not the primary object of desire;
  2. the family is the agent not the cause of psychic repression;
  3. the family is an inductor not an organizer;
  4. the family is the origin of the state's hold over us.

The family functions as a selection or triangulation of the subject.
It identifies who belongs by right and who does not (AO, 114/124).
It apportions roles which make us 'whole' persons - mum, dad, you,
your brother and your sister, and so on. It determines what it is right
and proper to do within the family - it instils the idea of the authority of the parent, the need to share and be fair among the siblings,
and so on.28 Once those selections have been made, once roles have
been assigned and the good and bad objects decided, the family
makes them all resonate together by connecting desire to these
'ready-mades' of social production. Ultimately, what Deleuze and
Guattari propose as an 'internally reversed' form of psychoanalysis
is one shorn of the family as the central organizing category. As
Deleuze and Guattari conceive it, the family is not a microcosmic
world within a world in which the drama of everyday life is played
out in small form and in such a way as to render redundant that
larger drama. It doesn't anticipate all the anxieties of later life by

                                    66

                            READING THE TEXT

giving anxiety itself its first and as it were final form. Neither does it
stamp our unconscious so that every event cannot but reverberate
with the sound of its petty furies. The various elements of the family
are constantly in touch with and connected to the 'elements of the
political and historical situation' itself, which exceeds the reaches of
Oedipus on all sides (AO, 107/115). Combining these points,
Deleuze and Guattari formulate the rule:

   [T]he mother and the father exist only as fragments, and are never
   organised into a figure or a structure able both to represent the
   unconscious, and to represent in it the various agents of collec-
   tivity; rather, they always shatter into fragments that come into
   contact with these agents, meet them face to face, square off with
   them, or settle the differences with them as in hand-to-hand
   combat. (AO, 106-7/115)

We'll see below how this position is arrived at in the course of the
enumeration of the five paralogisms.
   The first paralogism of psychoanalysis, the paralogism of extrapolation, is this: psychoanalysis converts a detachable partial object -
e.g., the penis - into a detached complete object, namely the phallus,
from which all subjects then derive by power of its attribution of
lack.29 The phallus is the one thing both sexes have in common
because they both suffer from its lack, albeit in different ways - for
women it is their point of departure (what they desire, or envy, above
all because they lack it), whereas for men it is effectively their destination (what they fear losing, above all, even though in a sense
they've never had it since the phallus qua phallus is by definition an
impossible, mythic object) (AO, 67/70). 'It is this conversion that
makes the whole of sexuality shift into the Oedipal framework: this
projection of all the break-flows onto the same mythical locale, and
all the nonsignifying signs into the same major signifier.' (AO,
81-2/87).
   By isolating the penis, which in Deleuze and Guattari's scheme of
things is simply one potential desiring-machine among others, one
possible partial object among many, and elevating it to the position
of the One-All (to adapt the term Badiou misapplies to Deleuze's
ontology30), i.e., the One that encompasses and includes under its
auspices the All, the phallus loses its 'virulence and efficacy' and
becomes instead a serene order of judgement, castrating everyone

                                    67

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

who falls under its gaze. The psychoanalytic 'cure', then, consists in
teaching girls to renounce their envious desire for a penis and boys
to renounce their 'protest', their apprehension that a 'passive' attitude towards other men amounts to the loss of their penis.31 In this
sense, it is psychoanalysis itself which is castrating: 'cured' is castrated (AO, 68/71). 'Here we have a properly analytical fallacy,'
Deleuze and Guattari write,

   that consists in passing from the detachable object to the position
   of a complete object as the thing detached (phallus). This passage
   implies a subject, defined as a fixed ego of one sex or the other,
   who necessarily experiences as a lack his subordination to the
   tyrannical complete object. (AO, 68/71)

The fallacy consists in giving primacy to the symbolic object, i.e., the
phallus, and consigning the actual penis and indeed all the sexual
organs to the pre-oedipal realm, implying that desire is motivated by
lack not plenitude.
   This brings us to the second paralogism, the paralogism of the
'double bind'. Contrary to Gregory Bateson, who argues in Steps to
an Ecology of Mind (the same book, incidentally, from which
Deleuze and Guattari draw inspiration for the concept of 'plateau')
that the family is schizophrenizing because of the impossible mutually exclusive demands it places on desire - love your parents, but
not too much - Deleuze and Guattari argue that the family is
Oedipalizing. More particularly, Deleuze and Guattari argue that
the cure, rather than the disease, is the double bind (AO, 88/94). If
one does not resign oneself to the fate of castration, and embrace
the dictates of one's sex, then one is condemned to the proverbial
dark night of the undifferentiated, the so-called 'polymorphic perversity' (Freud's phrase) of childhood eroticism, which knows
neither subject nor object. Oedipus is thus a paradoxical choice - a
double bind, in other words - between two equally undesirable outcomes: one must accept one's fate and find the means of coming to
terms with the lingering anxieties this choice entails, and in this way
resolve one's Oedipal complex, or else give in to ('fictitious') Oedipal
desires and thereby fall into the black hole of neurosis and social
ostracism. And everybody knows what psychoanalysis means by
resolving Oedipus: internalising it so as to better rediscover it on the
outside, in social authority, where it will be made to proliferate and

                                   68

                           READING THE TEXT

be passed on to the children.' (AO, 87/94). You get out of your
Oedipal 'crisis' by going into it more fully, by accepting its terms and
becoming Oedipalized. In this sense, as Deleuze and Guattari point
out, Oedipus is both a problem and a solution, and in its thrall one
is condemned to a perpetual oscillation between what are effectively
the two poles of a single Oedipalizing tendency: either you identify
with Oedipus and suffer it as a crisis, or you receive it as a structure
and you internalize it as an inner conflict. In other words, there is no
question of resolving one's Oedipal crisis, if by that one means
setting it aside forever, putting it beyond all thought. It stays with
you, burrowing further and further below the surface, blockading
the productive unconscious, pulling it up short at every turn.
   So, why can't we get out of the Oedipal trap? This brings us to the
third paralogism of application. As we saw with the previous paralogism, psychoanalysis rigs the game from the start: it fixes the social
field as a point of departure and the family as the point of destination. It assumes that the subject's place in the world, along with their
view of the world, and their way of relating to it, is decided, determined and shaped in the family setting. Psychoanalysis treats the
subject as though they were perpetually 'sick from their childhood'.
But even more tellingly, psychoanalysis assumes that in our childhood it is only the family that matters to us, that in effect we only
have eyes for mummy and daddy, as though all our games, dreams
and fantasies revolve around nothing but the shuttered-in trinity of
mummy-daddy-me. But as they point out, children are surely not
unaware of the fact that daddy 'has a boss who is not father's father,
or moreover that [their] father himself is a boss who is not a father'
(AO, 106/115).
   Psychoanalysis assumes that in our unconscious all social relations
are viewed through the lens of our childhood, such that even as adults
we continue to think of our boss and all other authority figures as
being like our father and suffer accordingly. We are thus 'sick from our
childhood' in a double sense: not only does our childhood, and its
various unresolved neuroses, serve as a constant point of reference for
everything that we do as adults, we are constantly falling into new
childhoods like so many pits of hell in which we create fresh examples
of the same old worries. And thus we come to the fourth paralogism
of fictitious desire. The law tells us: You will not marry your mother,
and you will not kill your father. And we docile subjects say to ourselves: so that's what I wanted.' (AO, 125/136). In assuming that if

                                   69

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

something is prohibited that must mean we secretly desire it, psychoanalysis misunderstands both how desire functions and how law functions. And we shouldn't think this only applies to incest - we must
extend this thinking to all prohibitions. It is an error in logic, Deleuze
and Guattari argue, to assume it is possible to deduce the nature of
what is prohibited from the prohibition itself. For a start, it means
assuming that what is prohibited is in fact a real desire, something that
we actually long to do, and would not hesitate to do were we not
restrained by law. By the same token, it assumes that the prohibition
is put in place solely to prevent or at least inhibit from being performed those acts society deems 'improper'. But the reality is, desire
is not that 'guilty' and the law that 'innocent'.

   For what really takes place is that the law prohibits something
   that is perfectly fictitious in the order of desire or of the
   'instincts', so as to persuade its subjects that they had the inten-
   tion corresponding to the fiction. This is indeed the only way the
   law has of getting a grip on intention, of making the unconscious
   guilty. (AO, 125/136)

Oedipus - that is, the incestuous desire for the mother and the associated desire to murder the father - is the bait repression employs to
snare real desire.

   If desire is repressed, this is not because it is desire for the mother
   and for the death of the father; on the contrary, desire becomes
   that only because it is repressed, it takes on that mask only under
   the reign of the repression that models the mask for it and plas-
   ters it on its face. (AO, 126/138)

Deleuze and Guattari dismiss as doubtful the realist objection that
one might make at this point that incest is an obstacle to the establishment of society. The real problem, they say, is elsewhere, and that
is in the nature of desire itself, which they maintain is revolutionary
in its essence: 'no society can tolerate a position of real desire
without its structures of exploitation, servitude, and hierarchy being
compromised.'(AO, 126-7/138).
    So how does the Oedipus trap work? Deleuze and Guattari
describe it as a fiendish apparatus with double pincers that leaves the
subject no room for manoeuvre whatsoever.

                                    70

                            READING THE TEXT

   By placing the distorting mirror of incest before desire (that's
   what you wanted, isn't it?), desire is shamed, stupefied, it is placed
   in a situation without exit, it is easily persuaded to deny 'itself in
   the name of the more important interests of civilisation (what if
   everyone did the same, what if everyone married his mother or
   kept his sister for himself? There would no longer be any
   differentiations, any exchange possible). (AO, 130/142)

There are two forms of repression at work here, which Deleuze and
Guattari term 'psychic repression' and 'social repression'. The
former is an unconscious operation, it is repression the mind or psychical apparatus applies internally but unknowingly to its instincts;
while the latter is a conscious operation, it is repression the mind
or psychical apparatus knowingly applies to the desires it thinks
it has. Psychoanalysis gives primacy to the former, treating the
latter as mere epiphenomena, as though the so-called 'incest taboo'
was somehow a natural or spontaneously occurring act of selfcensorship. Freud puts Oedipus before culture, before history; every
child, regardless of sex, irrespective of where or when they are born,
despite all differences of culture, religion, ethnicity, race, class, education and parenting, must resolve their desire to replace mummy or
daddy (depending on sex) in their relation with the parent of the
opposite sex. Achieving this is the principal aim or function of
psychic repression as psychoanalysis conceives it. Social repression,
on the Freudian view of things, comes to bear later, in a secondary
fashion, to keep in check the manifold 'returns of the repressed'
psychic repression is liable to.
   Deleuze and Guattari do not accept that psychic repression must,
as a matter of course, take this Oedipal form; in effect, they reject
the idea that as far as desire and repression goes there is a natural
order of things. Psychic repression is an instrument of social repression, they argue. Both bear on the same thing: desiring-production.
The question might arise at this point - if psychic repression is
an instrument of social repression then why speak of two repressions, why not say there is one form of repression and be done with
it? Very simply put, the role of psychic repression is to teach us to
desire social repression. In our society, it is the family that 'is the delegated agent of psychic repression, or rather the agent delegated to
psychic repression', and 'the incestuous drives are the disfigured
image of the repressed' (AO, 130/142). The family is the agent of

                                     71

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

Oedipalization, but not the cause. It creates the necessary conditions
for Oedipalization and ensures their perpetuation. The family is a
stimulus, but it is 'qualitatively indifferent, an inductor that is neither
an organiser nor a disorganiser' (AO, 108/117). Although the family
has a definite part to play in the Oedipalization of the subject, in the
perpetuation of Oedipus in general, Deleuze and Guattari conspicuously do not blame the family for either the role it has been given
to play in the service of social repression or the way it performs that
role. In short, the family isn't a powerful enough machine to bind all
its units to itself in such a way that nothing escapes or seeps in to
form unauthorized connections. Oedipalization, triangulation, castration, require 'forces a bit more powerful, a bit more subterranean
than psychoanalysis, than the family, than ideology, even joined
together'(AO, 132/145).
   This brings us to the fifth and final paralogism: the failure to recognize that it is desiring-production rather than the Oedipal complex
which is the actual or active factor.

                       The micropolitics of desire
It is at the level of passive synthesis that Deleuze and Guattari's
'micropolitics of desire', as they sometimes call it, actually takes
effect, because 'passive synthesis' is synonymous with the Real itself.
As far as Deleuze and Guattari are concerned, politics can only go
forwards (in the sense of advancing a radical change agenda, even an
open-ended one such as the one Deleuze and Guattari propose) by
focusing on the mechanisms of desiring-production itself, namely the
passive syntheses in all their permutations and arrangements. They
reject as imprecise political praxis built on the notion of ideology
and in its place offer the three syntheses of connection, disjunction
and conjunction as a more efficient means of mapping social and
political attitudes.
   Desiring-production has two modalities: either an illegitimate
conformist (i.e., neurotic or sedentary) mode comprised of global and
specific syntheses of connection, exclusive or restrictive syntheses of
disjunction and segregative and biunivocal syntheses of consumption, or a legitimate nonconformist (i.e., schizo or nomadic) mode
comprised of partial and non-specific syntheses of connection, inclusive or non-restrictive syntheses of disjunction, and nomadic or
polyvocal syntheses of consumption. Determining which of these

                                    72

                            READING THE TEXT

two modalities is dominant in any particular regime of desiringproduction encountered in history is the core of Deleuze and
Guattari's political analysis. There are of course stages in between
these two poles comprised of mixed permutations of legitimate and
illegitimate syntheses such as one finds in most forms of identity politics, which tend to argue for a liberation from the 'global or specific'
conception of the self so as to allow for the proliferation of nomadic
'differences' only to police those differences in an 'exclusive or restrictive' manner. Sorting through the inner complexity of different
regimes is in effect Deleuze and Guattari's method and mode of what
in a more traditional Marxist discourse is known as Ideologiekritik.
The ultimate practical aim of all such analyses is to figure out how the
illegitimate uses of the passive syntheses may be turned around and
converted into legitimate uses32 (AO, 76/80).
    What do Deleuze and Guattari mean by legitimate and illegitimate?

   In what he termed the critical revolution, Kant intended to dis-
   cover criteria immanent to understanding so as to distinguish the
   legitimate and illegitimate uses of syntheses of consciousness. In
   the name of transcendental philosophy (immanence of criteria),
   he therefore denounced the transcendent use of syntheses such as
   appeared in metaphysics. (AO, 83/89)

Their critique of psychoanalysis, which they define as materialist,
proceeds along the same path, 'denouncing the illegitimate use of
the syntheses of the unconscious as found in Oedipal psychoanalysis, so as to rediscover a transcendental unconscious defined by the
immanence of its criteria' (AO, 83/89). We have already seen what
this transcendental unconscious defined by the immanence of its criteria looks like: desiring-production. For Deleuze and Guattari the
path to a metaphysics of the unconscious, that is to say a conception
of the unconscious defined by transcendent criteria rather than
immanent criteria (i.e., criteria imposed upon it rather than discovered within it), is the apparently innocuous sounding question: 'what
does it mean?' In order to understand how the unconscious works
we have to first of all stop thinking of its productions in terms of
meaning. As we saw with Lenz, his delirium contains no meaning as
such, only effects - the feeling that he is but one cog in a much larger
machine has no meaning, it just is, and for so long as we insist on

                                    73

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

trying to connect this feeling to something outside and beyond it we
will misunderstand the unconscious and fall into metaphysics.
   The whole of what might be termed the schizoanalytic 'cure' starts
by tracing a line back to the productive unconscious, to the syntheses of desire, because it is only there that it is possible to bring about
the necessary reversal of illegitimate syntheses, and the restoration
of legitimate syntheses (AO, 123/134). As such, the illegitimate use
of the syntheses of desire can be used to triangulate our way back to
legitimate uses. The essential principle of this process is that in the
history of the unconscious in Lacan's sense (i.e., the history the
analysand recounts to the analyst), Oedipus always comes later, like
some foreign invader intent upon subduing and civilizing the
aboriginal population of the mind. Oedipus is not there from the
start, whether as latent structure or future crisis, but rather lays siege
to the unconscious from the outside and eventually captures and
appropriates to its own purposes all its mechanisms, twisting the
syntheses in illegitimate directions. The fact that the three syntheses
operate separately, but all at once, means that the capture of just one
of the three can be enough to distort the operation of all three. The
take-over doesn't need to happen all at once, in a single blow - it
can be progressive, degenerative, slow, insidious, and even pleasant.
Oedipalization isn't necessarily experienced as repressive - indeed, it
can even afford us with the gratification of finally understanding
ourselves: 'so that's why I did that!' Through the steady corruption
of legitimate uses of the passive syntheses into their opposite, the
Western subject was produced as the paranoid egomaniac we know
him to be. For this reason, as I will try to show in greater detail in
what follows, the illegitimate syntheses should in fact be the principal focus, at least in the first instance, of any schizoanalysis concerned with an understanding of contemporary culture.

                       The illegitimate syntheses

The illegitimate synthesis of connection
The first illegitimate use of the syntheses, which Deleuze and
Guattari also designate as the first of psychoanalysis's five paralogisms, relates to the Lacanian concept of lack.

   We are told that partial objects are caught up in an intuition of
   precocious totality, just as the ego is caught up in an intuition of

                                   74

                           READING THE TEXT

   unity that precedes its fulfilment. (Even in Melanie Klein, the
   schizoid partial object is related to a whole that prepares for the
   advent of the complete object in the depressive phase.) It is clear
   that such a totality-unity is posited only in terms of a certain
   mode of absence, as that which partial objects and subjects of
   desire lack'. (AO, 81/86)

Why does this constitute an illegitimate use of the synthesis of connection! Let us take a concrete example - the killer shark in Jaws
(Spielberg, 1975). As both Fredric Jameson and (after him) Slavoj
Zizek have argued, we fundamentally misunderstand the function of
the shark if we start by assuming it is an allegory of something in
particular.33 While it is obviously true that the shark could stand for
US imperialism (Fidel Castro's suggestion) or communism itself (to
vouch for the other side of that ideological divide), with the besieged
island of Amity standing for America itself in all its cliched glory -
exuberant teenagers, curmudgeonly small business owners, corrupt
politicians, a conflicted cop who loves his wife, and so on - the very
multiplicity of possibilities suggests that the true vocation of the
shark 'lies less in any single message or meaning than in its very
capacity to absorb and organise all these quite distinct anxieties
together'.34 Following Jameson's lead, Zizek argues that the shark is
phallic for precisely the reason that it has no meaning in itself, but
gives rise to the illusion that the text as a whole has meaning because
of its presence. As Zizek puts it, the shark is a perfect example of
'what Lacan calls a "point de caption": the emergence of the shark
as symbol does not add any new meaning, it simply reorganises
meanings which were already there by binding them to the same signifier'.35 What resists this binding is our fascination for and our
enjoyment of the shark's terrifying presence - Zizek then draws the
perfectly Deleuzian conclusion that you cannot have both meaning
and enjoyment in the one symbol, the former cancels out the latter
(AO, 177/190).
   The presence of the shark changes the way all the elements in the
set called Amity Island relate to each other. It brings out all the class
and generational antagonisms that propel the drama towards its
end, which isn't the defeat of the shark but the acceptance of something they all have in common and equally lack, call it 'community
spirit' or 'civic feeling' or whatever. In the midst of the crisis people
relate to one another according to their interests and what amounts

                                   75

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

to the same thing, their position in society, which in Deleuze and
Guattari's terms renders them 'global' and 'specific'. This point will
become clearer if we perform a Zizekian experiment and imagine
Jaws without the shark.36 Minus the shark, there would still be the
same inter-generational conflicts between 'spring break' college students partying on the beach and the prudish long-term residents of
Amity, the cop would still be the same burnt-out case looking for a
reason to believe in humanity, and the politicians would be just as
corrupt. Without the shark, these disparate, molecular desires (the
desire to party, the desire for propriety, and so on) would continue
to operate side by side, if not in harmony then not necessarily in conflict either, their endogenous status unchallenged, each of them
operating without much regard for the others and according to their
own internal dynamic. Obviously the appearance of the shark
changes everything - relations that had hitherto been endogenous
are suddenly brought into the sphere of an exogenous force, namely
the shark, and the disparate desires are made to seem 'selfish', which
is to say 'lacking' in 'community spirit'. The shark is both castrating
and phallic - it first of all denies the island of Amity its usual points
of cathexis: it prohibits the pleasures of swimming, sailing, skiing
and so forth, and that in turn inhibits the capitalist's pleasure in
drawing off a surplus profit from these pleasures, and that creates
conflict which upsets the placid life of the cop who just wants to keep
the peace. But even more importantly, whereas these disparate pleasures used to seem independent parts of no part, they now appear
to be the disconnected parts of an absent whole. It is the acceptance
of this perspective that is phallic because it reorganizes the very
function and distribution of desire.37
   That the scenario which confronts us in the hypothetical sharkfree Amity seems ripe for the kind of transformation the dramatic
entrance of the shark realizes, and simply boring without it, can
perhaps be taken as a measure of the degree to which we are already
Oedipalized. For what we expect as viewers is precisely the proper
Oedipalization of all this untamed desiring-production. The arc of
the narrative does not go from idyll through trauma back to idyll, nor
indeed from unresolved conflict and anxiety through cathartic trauma
to idyll (psychoanalysis makes both of these options available to us,
as does traditional narratology); but on the contrary, it goes from a
patently schizo situation of molecular desire through trauma to arrive
at a proper renunciation of desire and a weary resignation before the

                                   76

                            READING THE TEXT

law. The longed-for ideological pay-off of the film, i.e., the generic
moment when the town sets aside all its petty-seeming differences
and agrees to work together, apparently united in a common cause
(though in fact their cause remains purely individual because their
motivation is survival38), is a perfect illustration of Deleuze and
Guattari's thesis that it is castration that gives rise to the phallus. A
shark-free Amity is easy to imagine because the scenario of a small
town rife with petty rivalries and seemingly in need of something or
someone to pull it together is so familiar, as indeed is the inevitable
conclusion. Jaws is basically a western - it has all the requisite generic
elements: isolated small town dependent on the nature for its prosperity (in this case the sea as a tourist attraction), competing interests
amongst the townsfolk, a disaffected but expert sheriff, and a threatening outsider. The story unfolds and climaxes exactly as you would
expect of a western. My point is that the shark, fully as much as the
demonized Native Americans in actual westerns, is not meaningful in
itself; it is a mechanism whose purpose is to bring about a connective
synthesis. It is, however, an illegitimate synthesis because it determines in advance what its final form should be and passes judgement
on all who come before it in the name of that final form. Insofar as
the narrative constantly points to the lack of 'community spirit', the
failure to act collectively for the common good, as the true cause of
the disaster that unfolds, it imposes that sense of 'precocious totality'
mentioned above which has the invidious effect of making individuals caught up in its current feel incomplete.39
    Looked at from the point of view of function rather than
meaning, the principal desire in this narrative trope is the desire for
membership in the 'fused group' (to use Sartre's notion). It is this
 'fused group' or 'precocious totality', which lies at the heart of the
drama, not the shark. This is not to say the shark is unimportant.
But its importance lies less in what it might stand for than its
purpose and more especially the fact that its purpose is itself subject
to a festishistic appropriation. As Deleuze and Guattari maintain
with regards to Oedipus, it would not have the hold on Western
 society it does if it were not desired; the same must be said for the
shark: the fear it provokes in us is desired. The lack of 'community
spirit' is paradoxical in this regard because it is also clear that the
reason the 'community spirit' is lacking is that until now there had
been no reason for it to exist. In this sense, what is truly felt as
lacking is in fact the shark itself, the 'common enemy', because only

                                    77

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

by power of its menace can the island come together without having
to renounce individual interest. This longing is of course realized in
the subsequent sequels and copycat films that were made in the wake
of Jaws' phenomenal box-office success. But it is also to be found in
virtually every disaster movie ever made in Hollywood. That it is a
peculiarly American trope can perhaps be seen in the utterly
emblematic moment in Independence Day (Emmerich, 1996) when
Bill Pullman, playing an ex-fighter pilot turned President of the
United States, rallies the troops with a rousing speech in which it is
clear that fighting back against the alien intruders is the American
way and that America equals the world. One can really only understand westerns properly when it is grasped that the indigenous other
is always regarded as an intruder, an invader from afar, who has no
right to the land that manifest destiny put in the hands of white
Americans. The same is obviously true of the shark in Jaws, it too is
treated as an alien invader with no right to be where it is.

The illegitimate synthesis of disjunction
The peculiar effects of the illegitimate uses of the disjunctive synthesis are everywhere to be seen throughout literature and culture for
the simple reason that as we saw in the previous chapter this is the
supreme form of ideology itself. Hence the question which animates
so much of Anti-Oedipus\ 'Given a certain effect, what machine is
capable of producing it?' This question has the somewhat surprising
vocation of leading us towards what Jameson calls a 'dialectical
reversal', the paradoxical effect whereby what looked like a solution
or an achieved fact turns out to be nothing other than a question in
disguise. It is surprising because given Deleuze's famous declarations concerning his hatred of dialectics, it might be thought that
such effects would be anathema to Deleuze. But in fact the whole of
Anti-Oedipus can be construed as one long dialectical reversal inasmuch as it seizes on the Oedipal complex, which for psychoanalysis
is the solution to the problem of how desire functions, and transforms it into a problem all over again by asking how and under what
conditions we came to think of ourselves as Oedipalized. Any lingering doubt on this score is dispelled by the endorsement given to
Marx's On the Jewish Question, one of the great examples of dialectic analysis (AO, 89/96). The synthesis of disjunction is the mechanism that produces both the effect we refer to as 'the subject' and the
hailing effect known as 'interpellation' which positions that subject

                                  78

                           READING THE TEXT

in the social. As is the case with all the passive syntheses, the synthesis of disjunction is subject to both a legitimate (inclusive) and
illegitimate (exclusive) use, the latter being the more common.
   The Oedipalized subject - that is, the subject whose sexuality is
defined by the parental triangle of daddy-mommy-me - offers the
perfect example of the effect of the illegitimate or exclusive use of
the synthesis of disjunction. Oedipus works in two directions at
once, which is to say it entails two different types of disjunctive synthesis. To begin with, 'Oedipus informs us: if you don't follow the
lines of differentiation daddy-mommy-me, and the exclusive alternatives that delineate them, you will fall into the black night of the
undifferentiated.' (AO, 87/93). Having imposed this first dualism,
and forced us to choose the differentiated realm of the symbolic over
the undifferentiated realm of the imaginary (i.e., the adult realm of
language and expression over the infantile realm of imagination and
fantasy), Oedipus forces us to internalize a second dualism, namely
the distinction between self and other, along with the assumption
that the other is irreducibly different from the self. Oedipus 'forces
desire to take as its object the differentiated parental persons, and,
brandishing the threats of the undifferentiated, prohibits the correlative ego from satisfying its desires with these persons, in the name
of the same requirements of differentiation' (AO, 87/93). This is,
then, the second of the five paralogisms Deleuze and Guattari identify in psychoanalysis: as both a problem and a solution, Oedipus is
an instance of what Gregory Bateson referred to as a 'double bind'
(AO, 88/94). The essential form of the exclusive use of the synthesis
of disjunction is 'either/or' - either I am a man or a woman, young
or old, alive or dead, and so on.

   Everywhere in psychoanalysis, in Freud, we have seen this taste for
   exclusive disjunctions assert itself. It becomes nevertheless appar-
   ent that schizophrenia teaches us a singular extra-Oedipal lesson,
   and reveals to us an unknown force of the disjunctive synthesis,
   an immanent use that would no longer be exclusive or restrictive,
   but fully affirmative, non-restrictive, inclusive. (AO, 84/90)

This, Deleuze and Guattari admit, is perhaps the greatest logical
paradox we can conceive: a disjunction that separates terms without
at the same time using one to negate the other. Its form is 'either. . .
or ... or' and as Deleuze and Guattari illustrate examples of it are

                                   79

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

to be found in the work of Beckett, Nijinsky, Rimbaud, as well as
many others.

   I am God I am not God, I am God I am Man: it is not a matter
   of a synthesis that would go beyond the negative disjunctions of
   the derived reality, in an original reality of Man-God, but rather
   of an inclusive disjunction that carries out the synthesis itself in
   drifting from one term to another and following the distance
   between terms. (AO, 86/92)

 How is this possible? Everything depends on how one conceives of the
 terms themselves. To the schizophrenic, according to Deleuze and
 Guattari, the names of history do not designate persons living or
 dead, but states of intensity, or 'effects' - God is the feeling of omnipo-
 tence, divine fury, judgement, and so on, while Napoleon might be the
feeling of triumph, persecution, victory, defeat and so on.

   This can be clearly seen in physics, where proper names designate
   such effects within fields of potentials: the Joule effect, the
   Seebeck effect, the Kelvin effect. History is like physics: a Joan of
   Arc effect, a Heliogabalus effect - all the names of history, and
   not the name of the father. (AO, 95/103)

By invoking these names the schizophrenic is able to feel their power
and collects a 'fraudulent premium' from his avatars (AO, 97/105).
He does not identify with any of these figures, nor think of himself
as being any of the people he names; they are just so many singularities to be passed through as rapidly as possible.

   The schizophrenic is dead or alive, not both at once, but each of
   the two as the terminal point of a distance over which he glides.
   He is child or parent, not both, but the one at the end of the other,
   like the two ends of a stick in a nondecomposable space. This is
   the meaning of the disjunctions where Beckett records his char-
   acters and the events that befall them: everything divides, but into
   itself. (AO, 85/90-1)

  TV melodramas are precisely schizophrenic in this sense - the
great TV couples are those which constantly traverse the nondecomposable space of the question 'will they or won't they', which is the

                                     80

                           READING THE TEXT

dramatic cognate of 'either . . . or ... or'. This nondecomposable
space is of course the body without organs (or what we have termed
following Althusser the 'plane of obviousness') on which all the operations of the synthesis of disjunction always take place. And as every
TV producer knows, creating and preserving this nondecomposable
space is essential to the success of the show. Romantic couples
become boring the minute they step outside of this space and become
simply neurotic. One of the greatest examples of this is the 1980s TV
series that gave Bruce Willis his big start, Moonlighting. The tension
between his character and Cybil Shepherd's was wonderfully intense
until they became a couple in the official sense and after that the show
lost all its energy. The minute they stopped loving/hating one another
and agreed to work out their problems in a rational manner the show
lost its point. Their interminable bickering and priapic flirting was
the point, its nondecomposable space, it was what made the show
interesting. When they started making up after fights and carrying
through on their suggestive comments, the nature of their disjunctive
relationship underwent a profound change: it went from being inclusive and nonrestrictive to exclusive and restrictive. Suddenly their
feelings had to be clearly defined (love or hate), their actions clearly
specified (sex or not-sex), and in the process all intensity was flushed
away. So the perfect combination, from this perspective, as realized
in the case of Mulder and Scully in The X-Files, say, or Dawson and
Joey in Dawson's Creek, Buffy and Angel in Buffy the Vampire Slayer,
Clark and Lana in Smallville, even Xena and Gabriele in Xena: The
 Warrior Princess, is for the characters to act according to their desire
but never acknowledge it. Paradoxically, by not acknowledging their
desire, by refusing to yield to society's demand that desire must be
boxed up in categories, the subjects remain free to inhabit the nondecomposable space of intensity we call 'love'.
   The implicit practical problem in the foregoing example is this:
how do we move from the synthesis of disjunction to the body
without organs? The complication is that the real power of the
body without organs is its ability to make it appear that the problems
it poses (i.e., the syntheses of disjunction) can only be solved according to the conditions it specifies. Thus capitalist ideologues have
been able to represent the problem of Third World poverty as a
problem of distribution - the problem of insufficient capital in a particular place, the sprawling slums of Lagos, say, whose inhabitants
survive on less than a dollar a day, or less than what most Westerners

                                   81

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

cheerfully spend on a cup of coffee - rather than a problem of causation - the problem of too much capitalism, and the absence of an
alternative political model, rather than not enough capital. Capital is
in this sense both the problem and the solution, which is why Deleuze
and Guattari insist that the only way out of this deadlock is to reject
both the problem and the solution.40 The most efficient way of doing
this, as Jameson shows in his reading of Joseph Conrad's Lord Jim
(to borrow yet another concrete example from him), particularly
his analysis of the theme of ressentiment, is to treat the solution as
a problem in its own right. The choice of example is not accidental
or simply expedient. As Jameson demonstrates in The Political
Unconscious, Deleuze and Guattari's famous injunction against
asking what a text means can be read as an injunction against 'ethical
criticism' (Jameson's term), that is literary and cultural criticism concerned to interrogate either the meaning of human existence (e.g.,
'metaphysics') or human nature (e.g., 'humanism').41 Although both
of these schools of thought - metaphysics and humanism - have been
roundly criticized, almost into extinction, by Derrida and Althusser
respectively, that doesn't mean they have lost their relevance in everyday life, where they survive in the hardiest form of all as untested
'opinions'.42 'In its narrowest sense, ethical thought projects as
permanent features of human "experience", and thus a kind of
"wisdom" about personal life and interpersonal relations, what are in
reality the historical and institutional specifics of a determinate type
of group solidarity or class cohesion.'43 In other words, such
approaches to understanding culture obscure the real work of
desiring-production behind a smokescreen of 'effects'.
   Jameson's starting point, as we might expect, is to refuse to accept
the obviousness of the motivation of Conrad's tale, which supposedly centres on Jim's loss of honour following the Patna episode (in
which Jim disgraces himself as a man of the sea by jumping overboard to escape a ship that wasn't actually sinking) and his convoluted bid both to outrun his shame and at the same time regain his
self-esteem, firstly by being the most audacious chandler afloat and
then later on (and decisively) by showing selfless courage in the
attack on Patusan. Typically for Conrad, whose work is sometimes
described as expressionistic, the story is quite self-consciously the
dramatization of a concept (e.g., honour) - to use Deleuze's notion
from his book on Nietzsche - but, Jameson argues, if we go along
with this, then we are accepting Conrad's strategy of ideological

                                   82

                          READING THE TEXT

containment and allowing ourselves to be seduced by the plane of
obviousness he tempts us with. To counter this temptation, Jameson
suggests we ask ourselves, 'why we should be expected to assume, in
the midst of capitalism, that the aesthetic rehearsal of the problematics of a social value from a quite different mode of production -
the feudal ideology of honour - should need no justification and
should be expected to be of interest to us'.44 To put this in Deleuze
and Guattari's terms, what Jameson is effectively saying is that we
will misunderstand what is really going on in Lord Jim if we fail to
consider the nature of the relation between the surface level synthesis of disjunction, namely the matter of Jim's honour, and the more
deeply set level of the body without organs, which is the question of
why Jim's honour should matter to us in the first place and indeed
how and why other perhaps less arcane issues do not occupy our
attention instead. Determining the nature of the relation between a
particular synthesis of disjunction and the body without organs on
which it operates is what I am calling the Deleuzian equivalent of a
'dialectical reversal'. This demands, as Jameson explains, that we
grasp the conceptual antinomy of the disjunctive synthesis from
below, as it were, i.e., from the level of its historical context, as a
contradiction.45
   In order for me to explain this unfamiliar presentation of
Deleuze's thought, I need to add in here the reminder that Deleuze
and Guattari (twice) present the body without organs as the master
syllogism, by which they mean it appears as the third or transcendent term that unites and resolves a pair of opposites such as one
finds in an ethical binary (AO, 14/19; 84/90). This will perhaps be
clearer if we refer to another concrete example, the distinction
between good and evil let's say. As Nietzsche has shown, this distinction doesn't come from nowhere; it presupposes not only the
idea that it is possible to assign values to actions and behaviours,
but the desire as well as the power to do so (NP, 119-22/136-40).
The determination of good and evil is not self-evident, but invariably follows the interests of the powerful, as is apparent in the US
today where Christian fundamentalism is lauded as the good and
every other religious fundamentalism, but especially Muslim fundamentalism, is decried out of hand as evil. The powerful use the good
and evil syllogism to hide their interest. By acting as though the
basis of the distinction is obvious (in the Althusserian sense we
have already enunciated), power can validate its actions, however

                                  83

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

egregious, simply by claiming it is trying to abide by a universally
recognized objective distinction.
   Witness the US's justification of its invasion of Iraq in 2003 on the
grounds that it was acting pre-emptively to preserve democracy and
freedom. Thus, as Jameson puts it, 'we have forgotten the thrust of
Nietzsche's thought and lost everything scandalous and virulent
about it if we cannot understand how it is ethics itself which is the
ideological vehicle and the legitimation of concrete structures of
power and domination'.46 Jameson extends the thrust of this observation to Nietzsche himself, arguing that Nietzsche's solution to the
problem, his famous 'transvaluation of all values' supposed to take
us 'beyond good and evil' (undoubtedly his most famous slogan)
leaves intact the problem of why such an ethical binary was required
in the first place.
   The problem here, for Jameson, is Nietzsche's theory of ressentiment, which is supposed to explain how the good and evil binary was
constructed. The Christian ideas of charity, resignation and abnegation are, according to Nietzsche, the product of a slave mentality
and their purpose is to castrate the strong by making reaction (e.g.,
giving to the needy) the only authentic form of action.'Ressentiment
is the triumph of the weak as weak, the revolt of the slaves and their
victory as slaves.' (NP, 117/134). Nietzsche conceives ressentiment as
the spirit or force that prevents the strong - or, at any rate, those who
would be strong - from acting rather than reacting.

   Nietzsche's whole vision of history, his historical master narra-
   tive, is organised around this proposition, which diagnoses ethics
   in general and the Judeo-Christian tradition in particular as a
   revenge of the slaves upon the masters and an ideological ruse
   whereby the former infect the latter with a slave mentality - the
   ethos of charity - in order to rob them of their natural vitality
   and aggressive, properly aristocratic insolence.47

It is at this point, though, that Jameson and Deleuze diverge in their
apprehension of Nietzsche. For Jameson, the secondary adaptations
of Nietzsche's thought - in Taine, for instance - reveal its deeper political purpose, which not to put too fine a word on it is nothing less than
'counter-revolutionary'. Think of the way trade unions are denigrated by the Right for their selfish behaviour in exercising their collective bargaining power so as to extract better working conditions

                                   84

                           READING THE TEXT

even as it celebrates the allegedly virtuous selfishness of individual
employment contracts as a victory for freedom. In both cases the
theory of ressentiment as the triumph of the weak as weak is mobilized by the strong against the weak in the name of a putatively objective value behind which interest hides its face. Ressentiment, then, is a
means of coding the 'flow' of the revolutionary impulse so that it
appears self-discrediting.48
   How does this help us to understand Lord Jiml The problem of
honour inevitably evokes the theme of ressentiment, not least
because of its pre-eminence in intellectual circles at the time the
novel was written. In order to retrieve his lost honour, Jim has to first
of all conquer the sea, which he duly does (as I mentioned before)
by becoming an audacious chandler, invariably getting out to the
ships in harbour first, regardless of weather. But this isn't sufficient,
he also needs a human adversary for his transformation to be complete, which is where the ominous homme de ressentiment Gentleman
Brown fits into the picture. His is that pure form of evil against which
even the feeblest attempt to strike a blow can be construed as positive. Instructively enough, Conrad calls Brown 'a blind accomplice
of the Dark Powers', thereby exposing his narratological role as well
as his inner character.49 He is needed to compel Jim to act, to finally
put the welfare of others before his own and redeem himself. In other
words, both Jim and Gentleman Brown mark out regions on the
body without organs called 'honour' which through the world-weary
mouthpiece of Marlow the text constantly calls on us to treat in
an exclusive and restrictive way, as though they were not indeed
both products of the same impulse, namely the desire to submerge
knowledge of the structural transformation of daily life by the agencies of capitalism beneath a reassuringly chivalric story about the
deeds of individuals. And it is imputed, too, that we as readers are
too full of ressentiment ourselves to appreciate the real majesty of
Jim's achievements.50 The schizophrenic reading, then, the one that
brings about the dialectical reversal I mentioned, is the one that
treats the gap between Jim and Brown as a nondecomposable space
and their relationship as inclusive and non-restrictive.

The illegitimate synthesis of conjunction
If Lord Jim isn't an example of a schizophrenic text in Deleuze and
Guattari's sense of the word, but is merely susceptible to a schizophrenic reading such as the one I have briefly sketched above, it is

                                   85

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

because at its core it is dominated by the illegitimate segregative and
biunivocal use of the synthesis of conjunction. The entire tale is
predicated by Marlow's judgement, pronounced about a third way
through the novel - though in point of fact, narrating the moment
when he first clapped eyes on Jim. 'He was the right sort; he was one
of us.'51 (This, I take it, is simply the third person permutation of 'So
it's mer which is the essential form of the synthesis of conjunction.)
The same judgement motivated the earlier Heart of Darkness, which
served as our introduction to Marlow and was intended by Conrad
to function as a foil for Lord Jim. Kurtz is, in effect, a Lord Jim, too,
the difference being that he is also a Gentleman Brown. It is the
absence of a nondecomposable space between Kurtz and his Other
that makes Heart of Darkness such a different kind of tale on an
affective level, although as I want to stress here its structure is the
same. Kurtz, too, was 'one of us'. Conrad's insight, which is perfectly consistent with Deleuze and Guattari's analyses, is that the
latter yields the former.

   Oedipus [i.e., the 'one' with whom we make our 'us'] depends on
   this sort of nationalistic, religious, racist sentiment, and not the
   reverse: it is not the father who is projected onto the boss, but the
   boss who is applied to the father, either in order to tell us 'you will
   not surpass your father', or 'you will repress him to find our fore-
   fathers'. (AO, 114/123)

Segregation of this nationalistic, religious, racist, type is not a consequence of Oedipus, Deleuze and Guattari argue, but its precondition. The social field could not be 'reduced to the familial tie except
by presupposing an enormous archaism, an incarnation of the race
in person or in spirit: yes, I am one of you.' (AO, 114/123). This, as
we shall see, is ultimately a matter of what Deleuze and Guattari call
'group fantasy' - the legitimate and illegitimate syntheses of conjunction correspond to its counter-revolutionary and revolutionary
poles.

   When the notion of group fantasy was elaborated in the perspec-
   tive of institutional analysis - in the works of the team at La
   Borde Clinic, assembled around Jean Oury - the first task was to
   show it differed from individual fantasy. It became evident that
   group fantasy was inseparable from the 'symbolic' articulations

                                    86

                          READING THE TEXT

  that define a social field insofar as it is real, whereas the individ-
  ual fantasy fitted the whole of this field over 'imaginary' givens.
  If this first distinction is drawn out, we see that the individual
  fantasy is itself plugged into the existing social field, but appre-
  hends it in the form of imaginary qualities that confer on it a kind
  of transcendence or immortality under the shelter of which the
  individual, the ego, plays out its pseudo destiny: what does it
  matter if I die, says the general, since the Army is immortal? (AO,
  70/73)

It is important to Jim that his honour be restored because without
that he wouldn't have the consolation of its immortality. The immortality of the institutions we venerate is, according to Deleuze and
Guattari, the psychic vector that installs in the ego

  all the investments of repression, the phenomena of identifica-
  tion, of 'superegoization' and castration, all the resignation-
  desires (becoming a general; acquiring low, middle, or high rank),
  including the resignation to dying in the service of this order,
  whereas the drive itself is projected onto the outside and turned
  against the others (death to the foreigner, to those who are not of
  our own ranks!). (AO, 70/74)

Our identification with the institutions of power in the familial
fashion Deleuze and Guattari describe here is not attributable to the
fact that Oedipus is a universal and therefore we are unable to relate
to power except in this way. Deleuze and Guattari's point is that if
we happen to think of the Army as daddy it is because power has
learned that this is a highly efficient way of obtaining our docility.
This is the reason Oedipus is apparently everywhere, it serves a
useful purpose. (The key historical question asked by Anti-Oedipus,
which I will deal with more fully in the next section, is: how did we
become susceptible to Oedipus?)

   The revolutionary pole of group fantasy becomes visible, on the
   contrary, in the power to experience institutions themselves as
   mortal, to destroy them or change them according to the articu-
   lations of desire and the social field, by making the death instinct
   into a veritable institutional creativity. For that is precisely the
   criterion - at least the formal criterion - that distinguishes the

                                  87

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   revolutionary institution from the enormous inertia which the
   law communicates to institutions in an established order. As
   Nietzsche says; churches, armies, States - which of all these dogs
   wants to die? (AO, 70-1/74)

Is this not what all the colonial writers - from Kipling to Conrad to
Forster - feared most? That the empire and all its institutions might
prove to be not merely mortal, but sadly all too human as well? Is
this not the 'white man's burden', the constant need to prop up the
fantasy if not the actual reality of the immortal empire? Was this not
'the horror, the horror' of Kurtz's dying breath? And can we not see
Forster's emblematic exhortation 'only connect' as the desperate
plea of an individual fantasy that desires nothing so much as to be
properly plugged into a group fantasy, something able to confer the
feeling of immortality and relieve the ego of its anxiety. Group
fantasy incorporates into itself the various syntheses of disjunction
which cause our lives to be led in an exclusive and restrictive manner,
'in the sense that each subject, discharged of his personal identity
but not of his singularities, enters into relations with others following the communication proper to partial objects [synthesis of connection]: everyone passes into the body of the other on the body
without organs' (AO, 71/74).

               SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

  Hence the goal of schizoanalysis: to analyse the specific nature of the
  libidinal investments in the economic and political spheres, and
  thereby to show how, in the subject who desires, desire can be made to
  desire its own repression - whence the role of the death drive in the
  circuit connecting desire to the social sphere.
                        Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus

How then should we go about analysing the specific nature of the
libidinal investments in the economic and politic spheres? This
means reaching the point where we can grasp the fact 'the economic,
the political, and the religious are things that are invested by the
libido for themselves' and not as derivatives of 'mommy-daddy'
(AO, 200/216). Reaching this point is, Deleuze and Guattari
instruct, a two-step operation: first we need to study social institutions, or what they refer to as 'molar aggregates', and find out what

                                    88

                           READING THE TEXT

they mean; second, one needs to go beyond, or get beneath, these
molar aggregates, by searching for the 'molecular elements' constituting the various desiring-machines that compose and motivate
them.

  One searches for the way in which these machines function, for
  how they invest and underdetermine (subdetermineni) the social
  machines that they constitute on a large scale. One then reaches
  the regions of a productive, molecular, micrological, or micro-
  physical unconscious that no longer represents anything. (AO,
  200/216)

In this domain of the productive unconscious, sexuality ceases to
be a matter of relations between whole or global persons and
instead defines a molecular energy powering the three syntheses:

   For desiring-machines are precisely that: the microphysics of the
   unconscious, the elements of the microunconscious. But as such
   they never exist independently of the historical molar aggregates,
   of the macroscopic social formations that they constitute statis-
   tically. In this sense there is only desire and the social. Beneath the
   conscious investments of economic, political, religious, etc., for-
   mations, there are unconscious sexual investments, microinvest-
   ments that attest to the way in which desire is present in a social
   field, and joins this field to itself as the statistically determined
   domain that is bound to it. (AO, 200/216)

Admittedly, as methodological instruction goes, this gives us very
little to be going on with, but it does at least offer a clue as to their
social ontology, which is a very useful place to start.
   This history of social machines has a dual purpose. On the one
hand, it is an account of the coming into being of capitalism; on the
other hand, it is a genealogy of the contemporary structure of desire.
The three regimes - the primitive territorial regime, the despotic
regime and the modern capitalist regime - correspond to the three
points of Lacan's triadic mapping of the structure, namely the Real,
the Symbolic and the Imaginary. Perhaps the most striking aspect of
this genealogy is their repositioning of the Symbolic as the domain
of latency and the Imaginary as the realization of desire's trajectory.
Their conclusion is precisely that in contemporary society desire

                                   89

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S A/V7Y-OED/PUS

is trapped in a simulacral universe of mommy-daddy-me (AO,
286/315). When Deleuze and Guattari say that Anti-Oedipus was
intended to assist Lacan, to give him some help, what they mean is
this: they ground his concepts in history, thus answering the question Lacan himself left unanswered, namely the question of the
genealogy of his concepts (AO, 290/319). In the process, what they
aim to show is that it is capitalism itself that gives rise to Oedipus as
the dirty little secret of desire. The aim isn't to exonerate desire and
profess its innocence, however, but to show that it is primarily social
in nature.

   Yes, Oedipus is nevertheless the universal of desire, the product
   of universal history - but on one condition, which is not met by
   Freud: that Oedipus be capable, at least to a certain point, of con-
   ducting its autocritique. Universal history is nothing more than a
   theology if it does not seize control of the conditions of the con-
   tingent, singular existence, its irony, and its own critique. And
   what are these conditions, this point where the autocritique is
   possible and necessary? To discover beneath the familial reduc-
   tion the nature of the social investments of the unconscious.
   To discover beneath the individual fantasy the nature of group
   fantasies. (AO, 294/323)

This, finally, is what this chapter sets out to do: it shows that the personalization of desire represented by Lacan's triad is an effect of a
social machine, not a point of origin.

                    The ontology of social machines

Social machines are statistically constituted and follow a law of
large numbers (AO, 316/342). What do Deleuze and Guattari mean
by this? It is a code phrase implying that the social formation is
brought into being by the accumulation or aggregation of desiringmachines, but the net result of this process cannot be understood in
linear terms. In A Thousand Plateaus they explain their approach in
Darwinian terms, rejecting the inherent idealism of those histories
which grasp social formations in terms of degrees of development
or types of forms in favour of populations and coefficients of speed.
Forms do not precede or pre-exist populations, they are more like
their statistical result.

                                    90

                           READING THE TEXT

  Thus the relationship between embryogenesis and phylogenesis
  is reversed: the embryo does not testify to an absolute form
  preestablished in a closed milieu; rather, the phylogenesis of pop-
  ulations has at its disposal, in an open milieu, an entire range of
  relative forms to choose from, none of which is preestablished.
  (ATP, 54/64)

By the same token, the degrees of development are not degrees of
perfection measured against a pre-existing template or model, but
states of equilibrium in a more or less constant movement of variation whose end result cannot be known. 'Degrees are no longer measured in terms of increasing perfection or a differentiation and
increase in the complexity of the parts, but in terms of differential
relations and coefficients such as selective pressure, catalytic action,
speed of propagation, rate of growth, evolution, mutation, etc.'
(ATP, 54/64). Essentially what Deleuze and Guattari are arguing
here is this: the movement of microscopic entities combines to
produce macroscopic entities which in turn react on those same
microscopic entities, forcing them to adapt and change. As a simple
example of this, one can look at the notions of the crowd, herd or
swarm: all three are composed of x number of individual beings who
by themselves act quite differently to how they act in a group. To put
it another way, the behaviour of the individual components of these
three forms taken on their own is not a reliable indicator of the
behaviour of the crowd, herd or swarm. As is well known perfectly
docile men and women can behave with extraordinary courage or
equally extraordinary violence once swept up in a crowd.
   But crowds aren't true social formations inasmuch as they are
ephemeral gatherings of people, living and dying with the moment.
If anything they are more like limit-points of social formations,
moments of rupture with the potential to engulf and drown an existing social system. And throughout Deleuze and Guattari's work,
particularly in their accounts of schizo delirium, the crowd, herd or
swarm function emblematically as a kind of anti-social form, a form
of collectivity whose internal bonds are differently configured to
those of bourgeoise society in the era of late capitalism. True social
formations are more enduring than crowds and it is precisely the
problem of how they endure, or rather how they are made to be more
enduring than spontaneous irruptions like crowds, that is central to
this chapter of Anti-Oedipus. Deleuze and Guattari's thesis in this

                                   91

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

regard, though complex in its details, is in fact relatively simple and
not unfamiliar in its thrust: social formations come into being and
endure by capturing and coding the flows of desire. They are in
this precise sense machines, but in contrast to technical machines
which extend man's capacity to undertake defined tasks social
machines incorporate man himself into its mechanisms (AO,
155/165). As such, their formation is not simply a matter of 'scaling
up', that is going from a small group of persons to a large group
of persons, or even from a single individual to an entire nation.
Here it is worth observing that although it purports to be Deleuze
and Guattari inspired (but readily admits to its own originality),
Manuel DeLanda's 'assemblage theory', is in fact nothing other
than a theory of 'scaling up'.52 What DeLanda excises from Deleuze
and Guattari's theory is the difference in kind between the two
regimes of desiring-production: that is, between desiring-production
in its 'free labour' or schizo phase and desiring-production in its
'primitive accumulation' phase. He correctly emphasizes that since
the first book on David Hume it has been part of Deleuze's doctrine
that relations are external to their terms, but neglects the fact that in
what Deleuze refers to as a 'field of immanence' (such as one
encounters in the schizo delirium) terms cease to function as they
do in a transcendental field. In a 'field of immanence' all relations
are interior to their terms inasmuch that the terms themselves are
simply states of intensity through which desire passes (TRM,
384-9/359-63). There is no 'scaling up' from the schizo delirium to
the social field, instead one has to bring about an alteration in the
regime of desiring-production for change to occur. In other words,
what DeLanda eliminates from Deleuze and Guattari is desire
itself.53
   The first capture of desiring-production, that is to say the social
machine was the territorial machine. Invented by the so-called
'primitive peoples' it has now disappeared in most if not all places
in the world, surviving here and there only as a revenant, something
thought to be long dead but somehow still with us. Capitalism is
built on the ruins of social formations like the territorial machine
that went before it, mobilizing their eviscerated structures to its own
ends. In this precise sense it is correct, Deleuze and Guattari argue,
to 'understand all of history in the light of capitalism, provided that
the rules formulated by Marx are followed exactly' (AO, 153/163).
Principally, this means recognizing that history is contingent not

                                   92

                           READING THE TEXT

necessary (its necessity is always after the fact), that it comprises a
long sequence of accidents, mishaps, chance meetings and unexpected syntheses, rather than a logical progression from one kind of
society to another, or from conditions of scarcity to conditions of
plenitude. More especially, it means recognizing that history is discontinuous; it is made up of ruptures and limits, breaks and transformations, not continuity or progress.

   For great accidents were necessary, and amazing encounters that
   could have happened elsewhere, or before, or might never have
   happened, in order for the flows to escape coding and, escaping,
   to nonetheless fashion a new machine bearing the determinations
   of the capitalist socius. (AO, 154/163)

And as will be seen in more detail in what follows this is exactly the
way Deleuze and Guattari narrate the history of the formation of
capitalism. Deleuze and Guattari's hypothesis, which structures
their entire account of the genealogy of social forms is this: capitalism was known to the primitive peoples as that which would destroy
their society and their rituals were designed to preserve them from
this menace. 'If capitalism is the universal truth, it is so in the sense
that makes capitalism the negative of all social formations.' (AO,
168/180). Thus the two regimes preceding capitalism, the territorial
machine and the despotic machine, can be understood as 'negations
of negations' (to use Hegel's concept) in that their structures are
designed to inhibit the irruption of capitalism's free-flowing flows.
   This hypothesis has three components. First, it assumes that
desire is essentially gregarious in nature, inasmuch that as humans
we seem driven to want to live in groups. Deleuze and Guattari
arrive at this point in a classically dialectical manner, namely via
what Hegel referred to as the path of the negative (via negativa). If
desire was not gregarious, not part of the very infrastructure of
society, then, they reason, we could not explain how it is possible for
people to fight for their own oppression. But, by the same token,
desire is not bonding, it may bring a group together but it will not
necessarily enable the group to endure. Man is in this sense simultaneously Homo natura and Homo historia. This is the second assumption: desire has to be trained or disciplined to produce lasting
collectivities (AO, 208/227). For this reason, all social formations
prior to capitalism viewed the flows of desire as dangerous and they

                                   93

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

dealt with this danger by a practice Deleuze and Guattari refer to as
'coding'. 'Flows of women and children, flows of herds and of seed,
sperm flows, flows of shit, menstrual flows: nothing must escape
coding.' (AO, 156/166). This is the third assumption: desire is socialized by codification (i.e., the attribution of meaning). Women, children, herds, seed, sperm, shit, menstrual blood and so on are
transformed into gifts from God, or given some other symbolic
value and thereby given a social function they did not previously
have. This is what coding is at its most basic. When Deleuze and
Guattari say we should not ask about the meaning of something,
they are referring only to the operations of the unconscious. Beyond
that, as we saw above, they take exactly the opposite view: we must
inquire about meaning, but in a functional rather than semiotic
sense. What we have to decipher is the social purpose behind the
encoding of every aspect of daily life from the most mundane and
the sheerly biological to the complex and metaphysical.
   Anthropologists have of course been engaged in this task for a
century or more, but mostly with a view to trying to understand what
the codes mean to the people whose lives are structured by them.
Deleuze and Guattari do not take this route. They aren't interested in
'local knowledge' or in finding out 'what natives think' (in Clifford
Geertz's sense); rather what they are trying to discern is something on
the order of the universal. By universal they mean non-psychological
and indeed non-cultural. If a label has to be applied, then their choice
would be 'machinic'. According to Deleuze and Guattari, Nietzsche
rather than say Levi-Strauss or Mauss, has provided the most important account of the anthropology of so-called primitive society.
Nietzsche's thesis, which Deleuze and Guattari adopt and rewrite in
their own language (to the point even of speaking for Nietzsche), is as
follows: Man was constituted as a social being via the repression in
himself of what Deleuze and Guattari refer to as either the 'germinal
influx' or the 'biocosmic memory', by which they mean desire in its
'free labour' state, that is desire prior to 'primitive accumulation'.

   All the stupidity and the arbitrariness of the laws, all the pain of
   the initiations, the whole perverse apparatus of repression and
   education, the red-hot irons, and the atrocious procedures have
   only this meaning: to discipline man [dresser 1'homme], to mark
   him in his flesh, to render him capable of alliance, to form him
   within the debtor-creditor relation, which on both sides turns out

                                  94

                           READING THE TEXT

  to be a matter of memory - a memory straining toward the future.
  (AO, 207-8/225 translation modified)

Primitive rituals must suppress biological memory and transform it
into memory for man written in words. If as Lacan argues the
unconscious is structured like a language, then it is because of this
process, which Deleuze and Guattari refer to as the 'system of
cruelty' (after Nietzsche), and not a natural predisposition. The
system of cruelty ensures that the organs are 'hewn into the socius'
in such a way that 'man ceases to be a biological organism and
becomes a full body, an earth, to which his organs become attached,
where they are attracted, repelled, miraculated, following the
requirements of a socius.' (AO, 159/169).
   Primitive society is built on a foundation of collective ownership
of all organs - by contrast, what we think of as postmodern or contemporary society effectively reverses this process, and by 'privatizing' the organs subordinates us to them (AO, 157/167). The
collectively owned organs are referred to as the earth.

   The earth is the primitive, savage unity of desire and production.
   For the earth is not merely the multiple and divided object of
   labour, it is also the unique, indivisible entity, the full body that
   falls back on the forces of production and appropriates them for
   its own as the natural or divine precondition. (AO, 154-5/164)

The earth is the body without organs on a social scale - it is in effect
the body without organs of all the bodies without organs of all the
individual subjects in any given society. Communities are formed in
the same way as subjects: an aggregate of syntheses gives rise to a
'whole' that acts retroactively on the syntheses to yield an entity
qualitatively different from its component parts. That entity is then
enjoyed or consumed for itself. Deleuze and Guattari's thesis is that
communities can be formed in this way because subjects are formed
in this way. By the same token, subjects can be formed in this way
because communities are. This is what is meant by their thesis that
desire forms part of the infrastructure of society.
   Social production, that is desire on a social scale, is not different
in kind from desiring-production, indeed Deleuze and Guattari
insist it is exactly the same as desiring-production, but determined by historical conditions that this chapter sets out to specify.

                                   95

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

Desiring-production is also the limit of social production, it is what
social production reverts to if its structures and mechanisms fail or
are otherwise decomposed (e.g., schizophrenia). Social production
functions in the same way as desiring-production: it has the same
elements and the same processes; it differs only in modality (social
production is molar whereas desiring-production is molecular - this
is a difference in function not scale, the molar can reside in the individual just as the molecular can reside in the collective). It is on the
surface of the earth that all the practices of inscription and consumption that taken together comprise what we call everyday life
actually take place. Both the earth and the body without organs
must be understood, then, as agents of repression.54

                        The territorial machine

Deleuze and Guattari's conception of the territorial machine overturns two paradigmatic assumptions that have conditioned the field
of anthropology more or less since its inception: first, that the incest
taboo is universal and proscribes a real desire; second, that all relations between subjects are ultimately relations of exchange. Deleuze
and Guattari argue that neither of these hypotheses hold up under
scrutiny. Their counterargument is that the incest taboo is an instrument of socialization that captivates desire by luring it into feeling
guilty; and that society is inscriptive not exchangist.
   So, how does the territorial machine work? First of all it has to
capture desire and compel it to change function. There isn't a single
or universal repressing agent, Deleuze and Guattari insist, but rather
an affinity or co-efficiency between desiring-machines and social
machines (AO, 201/217). The medium through which this affinity or
co-efficiency works is the system of representation, which takes hold
of and represses the 'germinal influx' that is desire's representative.
The germinal influx refers to - that is, it presupposes - a flow that
isn't codable. By codable Deleuze and Guattari mean capable of generating an 'equivalent' of some type, something that can supplement
(in Derrida's sense) the original flow both in the sense of taking its
place and of multiplying it.

   For the flows to be codable, their energy must allow itself to be
   quantified and qualified; it is necessary that selections from the
   flows be made in relation to detachments from the chain: something

                                   96

                          READING THE TEXT

  must pass through but something must also be blocked, and some-
  thing must block and cause to pass through. (AO, 178/192)

What passes through compensates for what is blocked, creating a
surplus value of code which for Deleuze and Guattari is central to
understanding desire (AO, 179/192-3). Coding is usually, though
not exclusively, accomplished by means of prohibition and exclusion. The most well-known and indeed the most obviously significant example of this is the prohibition against incest. But as Deleuze
and Guattari insist, incest is strictly speaking impossible and herein
lays their practical dispute with psychoanalysis.

   The possibility of incest [from the point of view of the uncon-
   scious] would require both persons and names - son, sister, mother,
   brother, father. Now in the incestuous act we can have persons at
   our disposal, but they lose their names inasmuch as these names
   are inseparable from the prohibition that proscribes them as part-
   ners; or else the names subsist, and designate nothing more than
   prepersonal intensive states that could just as well 'extend' to
   other persons, as when one calls his legitimate wife 'mama', or
   one's sister his wife. (AO, 177/190)

We can 'never enjoy the person and the name at the same time - yet
this would be the condition for incest' (AO, 177/190). We can
only understand this if we go back to the discussion of desiringproduction and the legitimate and illegitimate uses of its syntheses.
The system of persons corresponds to the illegitimate use of the syntheses of the unconscious; it renders subjects global and specific and
institutes restrictive and segregative relations between them. By contrast, the system of names corresponds to the legitimate use of the
syntheses of the unconscious and it is this that is truly desired.

   What is desired is the intense germinal or germinative flow, where
   one would look in vain for persons or even functions discernible
   as father, mother, son, sister, etc., since these names only desig-
   nate intensive variations on the full body of the earth determined
   as the germen. (AO, 177/191)

What the incest prohibition in fact proscribes then is uncoded desire;
what the prohibition enacts is precisely a codification of desire.

                                  97

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

There are three levels to this codification: 'Incest as it is prohibited
(the form of discernible persons) is employed to repress incest as it
is desired (the substance of the intense earth).' (AO, 178/191).
Meanwhile the desire to transgress this prohibition, for which the
figure of Oedipus is emblematic, is put forward as a lure to conceal
the true form of desire. 'It matters little that this image is "impossible": it does its work from the moment that desire lets itself be
caught as though by the impossible itself. You see, that is what you
wanted!' (AO, 178/191). The three parts of the system then are: (1)
germinal influx as the representative of desire; (2) the prohibition
against this representative of desire is the repressing representation;
(3) while the figure of the transgressor is the displaced representative
(AO, 180-1/193).

  Incest is only the retroactive effect of the repressing representa-
  tion on the repressed representative: the representation disfigures
  or displaces this representative against which it is directed; it pro-
  jects onto the representative, categories, rendered discernible, that
  it has itself established; it applies to the representative terms that
  did not exist before the alliance organised the positive and the
  negative into a system in extension - the representation reduces
  the representative to what is blocked in the system. (AO, 181/195)

How does this work in practice? Consider for example the now
largely obsolete prohibition on sex before marriage in Western societies. This prohibition depicted sex outside of the marriage as deleterious to the well-being of both the individual and society itself
inasmuch as it was deemed to promote lasciviousness and a cavalier
attitude towards relationships. But as is obvious enough, it is the
prohibition itself that creates the possibility of 'sex before marriage',
which in this sense is equivalent to incest. The point is that the very
desire called 'sex before marriage' is created by the prohibition so as
to be dishonoured, and does not in this sense represent real desire. It
is a displacement of real desire which as Deleuze and Guattari tirelessly argue knows neither persons nor names. The supposed reward
for respecting this prohibition was a happier, longer-lasting marriage and a stable society in which to bring up one's children. More
particularly, respecting this code attracted prestige in the community, compensating for the loss of sexual freedom (libido is thus
converted into numen and then voluptas). The logic behind this

                                   98

                           READING THE TEXT

prohibition was extended to all aspects of daily life that might be
construed as condoning lasciviousness - so, for instance, in the 1950s
rock 'n' roll was subject to censorship. The length of skirts, the movement of hips when dancing, the style of music, were all seen as
releasing undesirable flows of desire that had to be dammed up.
Following Freud, Deleuze and Guattari refer to this process as secondary repression or repression proper (AO, 201/217). If this prohibition has fallen into a kind of moral redundancy it is perhaps
because it is seen as a contributing cause to an even graver moral
problem, 'extra-marital sex', inasmuch that by drastically restricting
sexual freedom on one side of the marriage divide it leads to delinquency on the other side. But we have to be wary of such conclusions
because this assumes that the prohibition is directed against an
actual pre-existing desire when in reality it is the prohibition that
makes it possible in the first place.
   Coding desire is not enough by itself to produce an enduring
social machine, however, it is merely the means. A change in the
nature of the relations between individuals in a group is required for
a social machine to come into being. There are two kinds of relationships between people in groups, according to Deleuze and
Guattari: affiliations and alliances, the former is linear in composition (uniting father and son to form a lineage) while the latter is
lateral (uniting brothers and cousins to form a tribe). The social
machine mobilizes both types towards its own ends.

   The whole system evolves between two poles: that of fusion
   through opposition to other groups, and that of scission through
   the constant formation of lineages aspiring to independence, with
   capitalisation of alliances and filiation. [. . .] The segmentary ter-
   ritorial machine makes use of scission to exorcise fusion, and
   impedes the concentration of power by maintaining the organs of
   chieftainry in a relationship of impotence with the group. (AO,
   167/179)

Rarely if ever mentioned in the secondary literature on Deleuze and
Guattari, filiation and alliance are absolutely central to any understanding of the political dimension of their work.55 Corresponding
to the legitimate and illegitimate uses of the passive syntheses - filiation is by nature intensive, non-specific, inclusive or non-restrictive
and polyvocal, while alliance is extensive, specific, exclusive or

                                   99

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

restrictive and segregative - filiation and alliance are 'like the two
forms of a primitive capital: fixed capital or filiative stock, and circulating capital or mobile blocks of debt' (AO, 161/172). The chief
is descended from a long line of chiefs and derives his right to rule
from his lineage (fixed capital); but he could not rule effectively if he
did not form and maintain alliances outside of his immediate family
through elaborate feasts and gift-giving, if in other words he did not
use his wealth to induce others to be in his debt (circulating capital).
By this means the chief converts perishable wealth - e.g., food, skins
and weapons - into imperishable prestige, namely the mandate to
rule. This disequilibrium in the machine is fundamental to its operation (AO, 164-5/176).
   In this system the negative that has constantly to be negated is the
apparent positive of 'stock', that is to say accumulated wealth that
if allowed to grow would become capital and thereby begin to
unleash flows of its own, flows that would escape codification. All
the variations on the potlatch rituals, some of which include the
deliberate destruction of surplus food by fire or dispatch into the
sea, are structured to achieve this goal of eliminating 'stock'. In
doing so, the tribe puts itself in the debt of its neighbours and at the
mercy of the elements, thereby ensuring by power of necessity that
all members of the tribe work together to stave off starvation. Tribe
members wear the signs of their tribe on their flesh in acknowledgement of this common cause and their individual indebtedness to the
tribe for providing for them.

   It is not because everyone is suspected, in advance, of being a
   future bad debtor; the contrary would be closer to the truth. It is
   the bad debtor who must be understood as if the marks had not
   sufficiently 'taken' on him, as if he were or had been unmarked.
   He has merely widened, beyond the limits allowed, the gap that
   separated the voice of alliance and the body of affiliation, to such
   a degree that it is necessary to re-establish the equilibrium
   through an increase in pain. (AO, 208/225)

Primitive inscription is the instrument whereby the intensive filiative
relations of lineage and descent are bonded with the extensive
allying relations of the tribe. However, alliances do not derive from
affiliations; on the contrary, they are designed to counter the concentrated power of affiliation. By the same token, alliances are not

                                   100

                           READING THE TEXT

the product of exchanges - the chief doesn't exchange his wealth for
allegiance; he must convert his wealth into allegiance. There is no
general equivalence - such as one finds in the capitalist system of
money - in the primitive economy which would enable exchange: in
consequence, and quite deliberately, the giver must always give more
than is strictly necessary so as to ensure indebtedness, but by the
same token to prevent this from becoming an exchange the ritual of
gift-giving makes the gift seem like a theft56 (AO, 203/219). The
problem [that the social machine must resolve] is one of passing
from an intensive energetic order to an extensive system, which comprises both qualitative alliances and extended filiations.' (AO,
170/183). This is the purpose of primitive inscription.
   Primitive inscription requires three things:

   a voice that speaks or intones, a sign marked in bare flesh, an eye
   that extracts enjoyment from the pain; these are the three sides of
   a savage triangle forming a territory of resonance and retention,
   a theatre of cruelty that implies the triple independence of the
   articulated voice, the graphic hand, and the appreciative eye. (AO,
   207/224)

The voice is the voice of the alliance, the marked body is the body of
affiliation, and the appreciative eye enables the declension of the
two. Primitive inscription should not be confused with writing -
indeed, Deleuze and Guattari go so far as to say it is writing's contrary (AO, 206/223).

   Savage formations are oral, are vocal, but not because they lack
   a graphic system: a dance on the earth, a drawing on the wall, a
   mark on the body are a graphic system, a geo-graphism, a geog-
   raphy. These formations are oral precisely because they possess a
   graphic system that is independent of the voice, a system that is
   not aligned on the voice and not subordinate to it, but connected
   to it, coordinated 'in an organisation that is radiating, as it were',
   and multidimensional. (AO, 206/222)

The tribal shaman, the one charged with the task of performing the
inscription, does not write on the body - the tribespeople are not
'branded' in ritual in the sense of simply acquiring an identity mark
that might perhaps be acquired by other less traumatic means.

                                   101

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4NT/-OED/PUS

Modern forms of so-called neo-tribalism, such as tattooing and
body-piercing, is not in this respect properly tribal or ritualistic. It is
both too aesthetic in its aims and too anaesthetic in its performance.
Thefleshmust be torn - the rock mustn't be too sharp - and the pain
witnessed for it is 'the terrible equivalence between the voice of
alliance that inflicts and constrains, and the body afflicted by the sign
that a hand is carving in it' that produces the desired result. Between
the voice and the hand, 'pain is like the surplus value that the eye
extracts, taking hold of the effect of active speech on the body, but
also of the reaction of the body insofar as it is acted upon' (AO,
207/224). The resulting mark attaches a name to a person and by
forcibly expelling the child from the world of the biocosmic creates
a subject whose organs have been pledged to the collective.

                         The despotic machine

Who brought the primitive system to an end? 'Some pack of blond
beasts of prey', as Nietzsche put it, meaning the founders of the state
(AO, 209/227). The basic components of the despotic machine were
always already present in the territorial machine, but ritual inoculated the socius against their toxic sting and prevented them from
becoming organized in such a way as to become machinic in their
own right. In this sense, it can even be said that the territorial
machine presupposes the despotic machine (AO, 239/260). That is to
say, it could not be haunted by what it could not imagine (even if it
could not give a definite shape to its fears), thus it has to be said that
the territorial machine knew about the despotic regime all along. The
extension of this thesis, which is central to Deleuze and Guattari's
account of the despotic regime, is that the state did not come into
being piecemeal, or in stages, but was born fully formed. 'The State
was not formed in progressive stages; it appears fully armed, a master
stroke executed all at once; the primordial Urstaat, the eternal model
of everything the State wants to be and desires.' (AO, 237/257). This
is only possible - in both the theoretical and historical sense of that
word, which is to say at once logical and realizable - because the
despotic state knows only a virtual existence. The despotic machine
is an abstraction that is only realized as an abstraction (AO, 240/261).
In this way, it conditions both what came before and what followed,
namely the primitive territorial machine and the modern capitalist
machine. This is only logically and practically possible insofar as we

                                    102

                           READING THE TEXT

conceive the despotic machine dialectically as a 'vanishing mediator'
(to use Jameson's important concept, which I will explain in a
moment).
   Any doubt that we might have that this concept should be so
understood - that it should be treated dialectically in other words -
is dispelled by Deleuze and Guattari themselves when they cite
Marx's concession in the introduction to the Grundrisse that it is possible, as Hegel insisted, for history to proceed from the abstract to
the concrete (AO, 240-1/261). Marx generally took the view that
Hegel got things back to front in this regard and famously described
his own conception of the dialectic as a case of standing Hegel on
his feet.57 The one exception to this rule, however, is money:

   Money may exist, and did exist historically, before capital existed,
   before banks existed, before wage labour existed, etc. Thus in this
   respect it may be said that the simpler category can express the
   dominant relations of a less developed whole, or else those sub-
   ordinate relations of a more developed whole which already had
   a historical existence before this whole developed in the direction
   expressed by a more concrete category. To that extent the path of
   abstract thought, rising from the simple to the combined, would
   correspond to the real historical process.58

Deleuze and Guattari argue that the concept of the state should be
thought in exactly the same way:

   The State was first this abstract unity that integrated subaggre-
   gates functioning separately; it is now subordinated to a field
   of forces whose flows it coordinates and whose autonomous
   relations of domination and subordination it expresses. (AO,
   241/261)

The crucial implication in all this is that the despotic machine has
never actually existed. Its existence is, and has only ever been, virtual
in nature. Therefore, our experience of the modern capitalist state in
either the personal or the collective sense cannot be used to guide us
in our understanding of the despotic machine. It does not function
in the same way as its (never extant) predecessor. Indeed, its function is purely theoretical: it mediates between the primitive territorial machine and the modern capitalist machine. It is a passage that

                                   103

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

follows the path of the knight's move, zigzagging from its point of
departure to its destination without stopping at any of the points in
between. Given that the despotic machine remains abstract throughout this process, it can only be described as a 'vanishing mediator',
that is to say a catalytic agent enabling the transmission of energies
between different mutually incompatible social regimes.

  In theory the despotic barbarian formation has to be conceived
  of in terms of an opposition between it and the primitive territo-
  rial machine: the birth of an empire. But in reality one can per-
  ceive the movement of this formation just as well when one
  empire breaks away from a preceding empire; or even when there
  arises the dream of a spiritual empire, or wherever empires fall
  into decadence. (AO, 211/228)

Deleuze and Guattari insist that the despotic machine is not a transitional stage between the primitive and the modern, and indeed it
could not be given its virtual status; but that doesn't stop it from
being a mediator of the vanishing type.

  Such a picture of historical change - however irreconcilable it
  may be with vulgar Marxism - is in reality perfectly consistent
  with genuine Marxist thinking and is, indeed, at one with the
  model proposed by Marx himself for the revolutions of 1789 and
  1848: in 1789 Jacobinism played the role of the vanishing media-
  tor, functioning as the conscious and almost Calvinistic guardian
  of revolutionary morality, of bourgeois universalistic and demo-
  cratic ideals, a guardianship that could be done away with in
  Thermidor, when the practical victory of the bourgeoisie was
  assured and an explicitly monetary and market system could
  come into being; and in that parody of 1789 which was the revo-
  lution of 1848, it was the similarly under the cloak of the trad-
  itions and values of the great revolution, and of the empire that
  followed it, that the new commercial society of the Second
  Empire emerged.59

So how does the despotic machine work? The founding of the
despotic machine or the barbarian socius can be summarized in the
following way: a new alliance and direct filiation. The despot challenges the lateral alliances and the extended filiations of the old

                                 104

                          READING THE TEXT

community. He imposes a new alliance system and places himself in
the direct filiation with the deity: the people must follow.' (AO,
210/228). The despot can be recognized by his willingness to start
from zero, to scratch out everything that had gone before and begin
again from a blank slate. Despotism is a form of social machine,
rather than a particular psychological state, and although it can be
the occasion of great violence, it need not manifest itself in a military operation. Moses, Saint-Paul, Saint-John, and even Christ, are
for this reason counted among the despots according to Deleuze and
Guattari, for what their visions entailed was precisely a new alliance
with God based on a filiation proclaiming a chosen people, God's
children (AO, 211/229). The despot, or his God, becomes the full
body on which the socius inscribes itself, replacing the territorial
machine's earth. However, what counts is not the person of the new
sovereign, nor indeed his psychology, but the nature of the new
regime this change inaugurates: the 'megamachine' of the state
replaces the territorial machine, a new hierarchy is installed, placing
the despot at the top and the villagers at the bottom, bureaucracy
replaces intertribal alliance, and most importantly of all stock
becomes the object of accumulation and correspondingly debt is
rendered infinite in the form of tribute to the despot (AO, 212/230).
'What is suppressed is not the former regime of lateral alliances and
extended filiations, but merely their determining character.' (AO,
213/231). The territorial machine's components continue to exist,
but only as the cogs and wheels of the despotic machine that has
overtaken them from within and without. The new regime overcodes
all the previous codings of desire and in this way extracts its requisite share of surplus value.
   As has already been signalled, the role of money is decisive in
understanding the despotic machine. The despotic machine, like the
primitive machine, feared the socially corrosive effects of decoded
flows, particularly the flows of money its merchants unleashed. But
having said that, money is the invention of the state, primarily for
the purposes of taxation by means of which the state rendered debt
infinite.

   The infinite creditor and infinite credit have replaced the blocks
   of mobile and finite debts. There is always a monotheism on the
   horizon of despotism: the debt becomes a debt of existence, a
   debt of the existence of the subjects themselves. A time will come

                                  105

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4/V77-OED/PUS

   when the creditor has not yet lent while the debtor never quits
   repaying, for repaying is a duty but lending is an option. (AO,
   215/234)

That time is now, as Deleuze would make explicit in his essay on the
'societies of control' (a nightmarish phrase he borrowed from
William Burroughs): 'A man is no longer a man confined but a man
in debt.' (N, 181/246). It is debt rather than the rule of law that holds
the despotic machine together (AO, 216/235).
   The implication of this statement, which in spite of appearances
actually has more to do with how representation works than history,
is probably not immediately obvious. It is, however, very clearly
directed against the concept of the 'Law of the father' underpinning
Lacan's psychoanalytically inflected semiotics (AO, 227/247). But
also, and more explicitly, Derrida's grammatological semiotics,
which does not draw a distinction between primitive inscription and
what Deleuze and Guattari refer to as barbarian writing. Contrary
to Derrida and indeed virtually the whole field of semiotics, with one
or two noble exceptions, Deleuze and Guattari maintain that unlike
the barbarian system of writing the primitive system of inscription
does not consist of signs of signs, but positions of desire. In the
despotic system, graphism aligns itself with the voice, inducing a
new voice which speaks from on high. Then there occurs a crushing
of the magic triangle: the voice no longer sings but dictates, decrees;
the graphy no longer dances, it ceases to animate bodies, but is set to
writing on tablets, stones, and books; the eye sets itself to reading.'
(AO, 223/243). The crushing of the magic triangle gives rise to a
mute voice that only expresses itself through writing, just as the
Bible records: God laid down his laws at the same moment he ceased
to speak directly to man.
   Now the question of 'what does it mean?' becomes possible - and
'problems of exegesis prevail over problems of use and efficacy. The
emperor, the god - what did he mean?' (AO, 224/243). It is our
concern for this mysterious meaning from on high that subordinates
us to the socius. We no longer require the mark of the socius in order
to express our commitment to it, to make patent our pact with
society. Henceforth writing can do nothing but bear witness to 'vanished despot' (AO, 225/245). There are two aspects to the becoming
of the state: first it internalizes a field of increasingly decoded social
forces (this could be said to constitute its physical system); second,

                                   106

                           READING THE TEXT

it spiritualizes a supraterrestrial field which it overcodes (this could
be said to constitute its metaphysical system). Translated, this means
the state unleashes market forces (i.e., decoded flows), that exceed its
grasp in all directions, its ability to overcode in other words, and this
process eventually leads to an inversion of the relation between the
sovereign and the system he heads. At the supreme point of the
development of this process of inversion, the state is transformed
into a mechanism of business. But even as its real power diminishes,
the state reinvents itself as a 'moral authority'. Thus, as Deleuze and
Guattari frequently say, what the state deterritorializes with one
hand it reterritorializes with the other. It provides the moral glue
that unites the axiomatic of capital with the assemblage of the
people.

                    The civilized capitalist machine

But these decoded flows unleashed by the despotic machine are not
by themselves enough to 'induce the birth of capitalism' (AO,
243/263). Capitalism does not begin, doesn't break free from the
long period of latency that is the despotic age (which in this section
Deleuze and Guattari start referring to by the more familiar name
of 'Feudalism'), and come into being in its own right until the
advent of the industrial revolution when it appropriates production
itself.

   Doubtless the merchant was very early an active factor in pro-
   duction, either by turning into an industrialist himself in occu-
   pations based on commerce, or by making artisans into his own
   intermediaries or employees (the struggle against the guilds and
   the monopolies). But capitalism doesn't begin, the capitalist
   machine is not assembled, until capital directly appropriates pro-
   duction, and until financial capital and merchant capital are no
   longer anything but specific functions corresponding to a division
   of labour in the capitalist mode of production in general. (AO,
   246/268)

This is the historical transformation for which Marx's general
formula of capital MCM' was intended, the moment when capital
begets capital, the moment when capital becomes filiative (AO,
247/269).

                                   107

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   This is no longer the cruelty of life, the terror of one life brought
   to bear against another life [as was the case in the primitive terri-
   torial machine], but a post-mortem despotism, the despot become
   anus and vampire: 'Capital is dead labour, that vampire-like, only
   lives by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour
   it sucks.' Industrial capital thus offers a new filiation that is a con-
   stituent part of the capitalist machine, in relation to which com-
   mercial capital and financial capital will now take the form of a
   new alliance by assuming specific functions. (AO, 248/270)

If one wants to understand how desire is induced, managed and
channelled into socially sanctioned avenues, then one needs to
understand how banking works, for it is banks that orchestrate this
new arrangement of filiation and alliance. Indeed, Deleuze and
Guattari will go so far as to say that if one wants to 'return to Marx'
(in the manner of Lacan's famous 'return to Freud'), then one needs
to return to his work on banking practice (AO, 250/273).
   As Deleuze and Guattari insist throughout Anti-Oedipus, contradictions are not what bring social systems down; on the contrary,
they are the very motors which give society its dynamism. Social
machines feed off

   the contradictions they give rise to, on the crises they provoke, on
   the anxieties they engender, and on the infernal operations they
   regenerate. Capitalism has learned this, and has ceased doubting
   itself, while even socialists have abandoned belief in the possibil-
   ity of capitalism's natural death by attrition. (AO, 166/178)

The defining contradiction at the heart of the modern capitalist
machine, the ultimate obscenity which it must constantly try to
paper over, is the scandalous difference in kind between the money
of the wage earner and the money of the financier, between money
that functions purely as payment (alliance) and money that functions as finance (filiation).

   In the one case, there are impotent money signs of exchange
   value, a flow of the means of payment relative to consumer goods
   and use values, and a one-to-one relation between money and an
   imposed range of products ('which I have a right to, which are my
   due, so they're mine'); in the other case, signs of the power of

                                   108

                           READING THE TEXT

  capital, flows of financing, a system of differential quotients of
  production that bear witness to a prospective force or to a long-
  term evaluation, not realisable hie et nunc, and functioning as an
  axiomatic of abstract quantities. (AO, 249/271)

The money in my pocket can be used to buy goods and even to set a
value on certain goods, but ultimately this is a limited power in that
its effects are always confined to an extremely localized sphere of
influence. In contrast, the financier's money is capable of affecting the
lives of millions, indeed billions, of people as is evident in the operations of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). These two institutions, supposedly disinterested and global in
outlook, but in reality acting out US policy, transform the finances of
whole nations into mere wage earner's payment money.60 Persuaded
that a First World standard of living is in reach, Third World nations
have taken on vast amounts of debt in order to undertake a variety of
infrastructure projects that have for the most part done little if anything to benefit the majority of citizens. That debt has meanwhile
reduced them to a state of peonage as the interest payments required
have sucked the life out of their national economies.61
   The dream the Third World has been talked into adopting as its
own is the dream of transforming payment money into finance
money. No

   integration of the dominated classes could occur without the
   shadow of this unapplied principle of convertibility - which is
   enough, however, to ensure that the Desire of the most disadvan-
   taged creature will invest with all its strength, irrespective of any
   economic understanding or lack of it, the capitalist social field as
   a whole. (AO, 249-50/272)

Thus Deleuze and Guattari can say it is the banks that control desire
in contemporary society. This is no less true today than it was in
1972, when Anti-Oedipus was published; indeed it is no exaggeration
to say that it is truer today than it was then.62

   Measuring the two orders of magnitude [i.e., the two types of
   money] in terms of the same analytic unit is a pure fiction, a
   cosmic swindle, as if one were to measure intergalactic or intra-
   atomic distances in metres and centimetres. There is no common

                                   109

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   measure between the value of the enterprises and that of the
   labour capacity of wage earners. (AO, 250/273)

As Michael Parenti argues, terms like 'development' (as found in
such bureaucratic buzz-words like 'community development' or
'developing world') are mobilized to disguise precisely this fact.
Contemporary cultural studies' refusal of such labels as 'First
World' and 'Third World', allegedly on the grounds that such terms
are elitist, cannot but be seen as complicit, albeit unwittingly, with
the present order of things known as the 'Washington Consensus'.63
   This dualism at the heart of the capitalist system has its own inner
dynamic which Marx himself diagnozed as the tendency towards a
falling rate of profit. Capitalist investment is constantly coming up
against this problem. No matter how profitable an investment initially is, the rate of profit-making inevitably declines over time. In a
housing boom, to take a relatively simple example, prices might rise
by as much as 100 per cent in the space of a year, effectively doubling
the cost of houses, which is an astonishing rate of profit-making. If
a house cost $100,000 at the start of the year, it would be worth
$200,000 by the year's end. If the same rate of profit-making were to
continue, it would be worth $400,000 at the end of the second year,
and so on. Tied as it is to a host of external factors, including the cost
of borrowing money, the relative cost of real estate elsewhere, the real
growth in wages, and so on, this rate of profit-making rarely lasts
more than a year or so in the housing market, which is why such
moments are referred to as 'booms'. They are short-lasting and powerful in effect, but ultimately unsustainable. Smart property investors
know this and are constantly on the look-out for the next boom as a
way of maintaining the rate of profit-making. On a larger scale,
manufacturing has been exported from the First World to the Third
World for the same reason: to maintain the rate of profit. It is much
cheaper to manufacture goods in the low wage regions of the Third
World, but those cost savings are rarely passed onto the consumer.
More usually they are passed directly to the company directors and
shareholders in the form of dividends and an enhanced capitalization
of their stock. The tendency towards a falling rate of profit is a continually recurring 'crisis' for capitalism, but not one it has any interest in overcoming. In fact, it is the principal motor powering the
system, giving it its restless energy. This is what Deleuze and Guattari
mean when they say the system only works by breaking down.

                                   110

                           READING THE TEXT

   If capitalism is the exterior limit of all societies [as was argued
   above in relation to the primitive territorial machine and the
   despotic machine], this is because capitalism for its part has no
   exterior limit, but only an interior limit that is capital itself and
   that it does not encounter, but reproduces by always displacing it.
   (AO, 251/274)

Capitalism thrives on its own self-induced crises. Deleuze and
Guattari describe this process as 'schizophrenization', whereby capitalism displaces its crisis of accumulation from the centre to the
periphery and back again. This process, also known as the 'development of underdevelopment', enables the centre to maintain its
rate of profit, viewed from the global perspective of capitalism itself,
but leads to the destruction of local industry (all sectors - primary,
secondary and tertiary) in the periphery (AO, 254/277). But in spite
of its willingness to change, even if that means destroying tradition,
capitalism is essentially conservative in its outlook. It only embraces
innovation when it is profitable to do so. 'In general, the introduction of innovations always tends to be delayed beyond the time scientifically necessary, until the moment when the market forecasts
justify their exploitation on a large scale.' (AO, 254/277). That this is
true can readily be seen in the criminally sluggish response by governments to the threat of climate change, particularly in those countries who are among the worst offenders such as the US and
Australia. In a way, it compels us to accept the neo-liberal dictum
that the only solution to the problem of global warming is a market
solution, however distasteful that might be to some (including
myself, I might add), because capitalist society only responds to the
opportunity to make a profit.
   If government can make environmentally responsible business
practice profitable, then business will willingly embrace it. This is the
thinking behind the 'cap and trade' model the European Union has
adopted for carbon outputs: it requires businesses to reduce their
carbon emissions by allocating an emissions quota, but also allows
businesses to sell any surplus in their quota they might obtain
through efficiency. In this way, as more than a few commentators
have already complained, government has effectively given businesses in Europe a new and potentially valuable asset for free. The
upside, it is hoped, is that now businesses have been given a powerful incentive to voluntarily reduce emissions they will adopt a

                                   111

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

greener attitude as making good business sense. Time will tell if this
strategy works. It has worked in the case of sulphur emissions in the
US, where a similar model was put in place a decade ago. What this
means, however, is that the role of the state has dramatically changed
from the despotic era: it no longer absorbs surplus value, but adds
to it by creating the conditions in which capitalism thrives (AO,
255/27S).64
    But it is not even the economic changes capitalism entails that is
decisive as far as Deleuze and Guattari are concerned. It is rather
the nature of the social machine it produces that it is crucial. It has
two main characteristics, which at first glance might appear contradictory: on the one hand, it stimulates (over-)production via a
radical process of decoding; but on the other hand it retards that
production by insinuating anti-production into every level of
society. As we have seen, the primitive territorial machine established the social unit by coding the flows of desire, by giving them
a meaning; the despotic machine loosened these codes up, but also
bonded them to its own regime by overcoding them. It emptied the
codes of their sacred content and at the same time spiritualized
them, making them part of what defined 'good society'. Thus to use
our previous example, if sex before marriage was prohibited in
primitive society because it offended the gods, then in the despotic
regime it was prohibited because it threatened the smooth transfer
of capital (e.g., children born out of wedlock could not inherit
property).
    Capitalist decoding evacuates the meaning out of all codes, that
is to say all the rules, regulations, laws, codes of conduct, and so
forth, rendering them completely arbitrary, or rather purely functional. Decoding in this context doesn't mean interpretation or deciphering, it literally means taking the code away. Taking their place
is the axiomatic.65 'Why not merely say that capitalism replaces one
code with another, that it carries into effect a new type of coding?'
(AO, 268/294). Because the axiomatic is different in kind to the code;
it is unavowable:

   there is not a single economic or financial operation that, assum-
   ing it is translated in terms of code, would not lay bare its own
   unavowable nature, that is, its intrinsic perversion or essential
   cynicism (the age of bad conscience is also the age of pure cyni-
   cism). (AO, 268/294)

                                  112

                           READING THE TEXT

Capitalism is not something we can believe in - not even those free
marketers who profess to 'believe' in the market actually do, otherwise they would not also demand its regulation. The US demands
free access to global markets, but does not reciprocate: its markets
are tightly controlled. But having said that, capitalism's flows aren't
codeable: money is a general equivalent giving common measure to
all things, but in itself floats free of all attempts to give it meaning
(such as the gold standard that once served to guarantee currency)
(AO, 269-70/294).
   Capitalism doesn't require our belief to function, but it does
require regulation. It unleashes flows that need damping if they
aren't to carry the system itself into ruin. It needs to produce antiproduction as well as production. The drive to innovation needs to
be countered by the manufacture of stupidity. The State, its police,
and its army form a gigantic enterprise of anti-production, but at the
heart of production itself, and conditioning this production.' (AO,
256/280). The apparatus of anti-production serves two key functions:

   On the one hand, it alone is capable of realising capitalism's
   supreme goal, which is to produce in the large aggregates, to
   introduce lack where there is always too much, by effecting the
   absorption of overabundant resources. On the other hand, it
   alone doubles the capital and the flow of knowledge with a
   capital and an equivalent flow of stupidity [connerie] that also
   effects an absorption and a realisation, and that ensures the inte-
   gration of groups and individuals into the system. (AO, 256/280)

Deleuze and Guattari have in mind what is sometimes referred to
as 'military-Keynesianism', the process whereby governments use
investment in military infrastructure as a mainstay of the economy.
No government practises 'military-Keynesianism' more than the US,
despite its constant anti-government spending rhetoric. The fact is
the US government spends the equivalent of the entire GDP of India
on its military and still worries that it hasn't spent enough. The statistics on military expenditure are nothing less than mind-boggling,
but just to give one example that will speak directly to the point of
the manufacture of stupidity: it is estimated that the cost of one
fighter jet, an FA-18, say, which can cost upwards of SUS300 million,
would be sufficient to put 5,000 people through university. The
infamous stealth bombers cost several times that figure. Meanwhile

                                  113

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S >W7Y-OED/PUS

higher education in the US is becoming increasingly expensive
and further and further beyond the reach of all but the wealthy few.
But Deleuze and Guattari don't just mean these are stupid choices
for a government to make, though undoubtedly they wouldn't disagree on that score; rather, by stupidity they mean the manufacture
of consent, the constant flow of 'reasons to believe in this world'
(to adapt a phrase from Deleuze's books on cinema). Ultimately
this takes the form of a substitution of economics for politics. As
Ranciere argues, 'economic necessity', the catch cry of all governments in the postmodern era, is an extremely powerful depoliticizing
card for politics to play.66 No one has understood Althusser's dictum
that the economic is the ultimately determining agency better than
the neo-liberals, who have turned it into the source of their political
legitimacy (their body without organs in other words).

  Marx often alluded to the Golden Age of the capitalist, when the
  latter didn't hide his own cynicism: in the beginning, at least, he
  could not be unaware of what he was doing, extorting surplus
  value. But how this cynicism has grown - to the point where he is
  able to declare: no, nobody is being robbed! (AO, 259/284)

  This brings us to a second Marxian law adopted by Deleuze and
Guattari in addition to the tendency towards a falling rate of profit
and that is its complement: the law of the counteracted tendency.

   [Capitalism is] the limit of all societies, insofar as it brings about
   the decoding of the flows that the other social formations coded
   and overcoded. But it is the relative limit of every society; it effects
   relative breaks, because it substitutes for the codes an extremely
   rigorous axiomatic that maintains the energy of the flows in a
   bound state on the body of capital as a socius that is deterritori-
   alised, but also a socius that is even more pitiless than any other.
   (AO, 267/292)

Schizophrenia is the true, or absolute, limit of society, inasmuch that
as we have seen what it brings about is a generalized freeing of all
the flows of desire.

   Hence one can say that schizophrenia is the exterior limit of cap-
   italism itself or the conclusion of its deepest tendency, but that

                                    114

                           READING THE TEXT

  capitalism only functions on condition that it inhibit this ten-
  dency, or that it push it back or displace this limit, by substitut-
  ing for its own immanent relative limits, which it continually
  reproduces on a widened scale. It axiomatises with one hand what
  it decodes with the other. Such is the way one must reinterpret the
  Marxist law of the counteracting tendency. (AO, 267/292)

Today, this is the role assigned to religions and traditions: the
absorption of the deracinated energies capitalism has detached from
its body. This is what Deleuze and Guattari mean by reterritorialization: the tying back down of desire. Consider the recent controversy in France over the right of Muslim girls to wear afoulard (head
scarf) to school. Here the issue is not so much why the French government wanted to ban it, since that is fairly obvious - it made good
political sense to do so (in Le Pen's case it was nearly enough to win
him the Presidency) - but why the girls should want to wear them in
the first place given that in France there is no requirement to do so.
Indeed, in 2003, out of approximately 250,000 Muslim schoolgirls
in France it was estimated that only 1,200 actually wore a foulard
with any regularity. One obvious explanation for their decision to
wear the scarf in spite of the freedom not to do so is that it enables
them to construct a Muslim identity as a means of negotiating a
space for themselves in a culture that isn't their own.67 Far from
being coerced into wearing the foulard, far from it being a sign of
their oppression by a patriarchal doctrine as many French feminists
argued, Muslim schoolgirls chose to do so because it was empowering. The foulard is a 'neoterritoriality', an archaism with a perfectly
modern function (AO, 279/306).
   Modern societies are caught between two poles.

   Born of decoding and deterritorialisation, on the ruins of the
   despotic machine, these societies are caught between the Urstaat
   that they would like to resuscitate as an overcoding and reterrito-
   rialising unity, and the unfettered flows that carry them toward an
   absolute threshold. (AO, 282/309)

In effect, modern societies are torn in two directions: 'archaism and
futurism, neoarchaism and ex-futurism, paranoia and schizophrenia' (AO, 282/309-10). What is crucial to understand in all this is
that the relations of alliance and filiation which structure all types of

                                   115

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

society no longer apply to people, as they did in the previous territorial and despotic regimes. In the modern state, these relations
apply to money. In this situation, 'the family becomes a microcosm,
suited to expressing what it no longer dominates' (AO, 286/315).
The family becomes an object of consumption in the modern
system. It is on this terrain that Oedipus can finally take root. 'The
Oedipal triangle is the personal and private territoriality that corresponds to all of capitalism's efforts at social reterritorialisation.' (AO,
289/317). Its purpose is to neutralize the threat of schizophrenia, the
modern capitalist machine's absolute limit, by creating an interior
limit to the movement of desire that pulls it up short of the exterior
limit (i.e., schizophrenia).

                 INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

  A little additional effort is enough to overturn everything, and to lead
  us finally toward other far-off places.
                         Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus

  Schizoanalysis has one single aim - to get revolutionary, artistic, and
  analytic machines working as parts, cogs, of one another.
                                           Gilles Deleuze, Negotiations

So, what is the revolutionary path? What is the solution?

   Is there one? - To withdraw from the world market, as Samir
   Amin advises Third World countries to do, in a curious revival of
   the fascist 'economic solution'? Or might it be to go in the oppo-
   site direction? To go still further, that is, in the movement of the
   market, of decoding and deterritorialisation? (AO, 260/285)

Perhaps we haven't gone far enough? Perhaps the means to bringing
about the end of the present system lies within it?68 Psychoanalysis is
no help in sorting this question out, Deleuze and Guattari argue,
because it is already part of the very social system they aim to critique.
So what does schizoanalysis propose? Deleuze and Guattari do not
offer a model that we can follow if we want to be revolutionaries. They
do, however, outline three tasks - one negative and two positive - that
will better position us to become revolutionaries, should we choose
to go down that path, by arming us against the many betrayals all

                                    116

                            READING THE TEXT

revolutions seem to suffer, namely the betrayals that come from
within. Anti-Oedipus is not so much pro-revolution as it is anticounterrevolution. The fascist inside that Foucault warns us against
in his preface is precisely the counterrevolutionary, the revolutionary
who has lost their faith in the revolution, the courage of their convictions, and the will to change. In this sense, Anti-Oedipus is a polemic
against both the cynicism of the right and the defeatism of the left.

                            The negative task

'Destroy, destroy. The task of schizoanalysis goes by way of destruction - a whole scouring of the unconscious, a complete curettage.'
(AO, 342/371). What must be destroyed? Oedipus, the ego, the superego, guilt, law, castration, all these things must be rooted out at the
source. It isn't simply a matter of 'working through' these things,
either, as one does in psychoanalysis, since this only destroys something the better to conserve it. In psychoanalysis we 'work through'
our guilt not to get rid of it, but to own to it, to internalize it all the
more. We overcome our castration anxiety so as to reach the point
of resignation and acceptance psychoanalysis demands of us.
Identifying with our symptoms, as the Lacanians demand, is not the
same thing as extinguishing the cause of the symptoms, namely,
guilt, law and castration. Getting rid of Oedipus in this sense
simply means turning it into an idea, which is in fact its most toxic
form. 'Only the idea can inject venom.' (AO, 343/372). The destruction process Deleuze and Guattari have in mind is much more thoroughgoing in purpose and effect than anything contemplated by
psychoanalysis. As we've seen already, getting rid of Oedipus for
Deleuze and Guattari means getting rid of it both as a problem and
a solution. Thus one can neither retreat to a pre-Oedipal phase nor
project a post-Oedipal phase as a means of escaping the Oedipal
trap. Ultimately what's at stake is the rediscovery of the anOedipal
operation of desire behind and beneath Oedipal representations.
Destruction is essentially a practical matter of undoing the complex
set of illusions (i.e., territories in Deleuze and Guattari's terms) by
means of which we give structure and purpose to our lives. But it
also entails a politics. Perhaps it should be said that the only effective
politics is a practical one - this would be the meaning then of 'practical Deleuzism', the watchword of this project. That is certainly the
approach Deleuze and Guattari take.

                                    117

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   In agreement with psychoanalysis, Deleuze and Guattari take the
view that

   unconscious representations can never be apprehended indepen-
   dently of the deformations, disguises, or displacements it under-
   goes. Unconscious representation therefore comprises essentially,
   by virtue of its own law, a represented that is displaced in relation
   to an agency in a constant state of displacement. (AO, 344/373)

But, they say, psychoanalysis draws two false conclusions from this
initial premise. First, that the agency in question can be discerned on
the flipside of the displaced represented; and second, that this
agency is a nonrepresented representative (or 'lack') obtruding in the
sphere of representation. For Deleuze and Guattari, the locus classicus of this particular error is the assumption that one can deduce
the nature of desire from what is prohibited. As we saw in the case
of incest (see previous section), the prohibition is a way of dishonouring desire, a way of trapping it with a false image.

   Oedipus is indeed the displaced represented; yes, castration is
   indeed the representative, the displacing agency (le deplaganf), the
   signifier - but none of that constitutes an unconscious material,
   nor does any of it concern the productions of the unconscious.
   Oedipus, castration, the signifier, etc., exist at the crossroads
   of two operations of capture: one where repressive social pro-
   duction becomes replaced by beliefs, the other where repressed
   desiring-production finds itself replaced by representations.
   (AO, 345/374)

It is this operation of capture that needs to be understood if an
effective 'cure' is to be carried out, one that actually extinguishes the
cause of particular symptoms. That psychoanalysis goes about this
in the wrong way is obvious, Deleuze and Guattari argue, from the
fact that the peculiarly pernicious effect of the so-called psychoanalytic cure is that it preserves the very thing it is supposed to get rid
of: it causes repudiated beliefs to survive and unbelievers to believe,
by creating 'a private territory for them' (AO, 345/374).

   That is why, inversely, schizoanalysis must devote itself with all
   its strength to the necessary destructions. Destroying beliefs and

                                   118

                           READING THE TEXT

  representations, theatrical scenes. And when engaged in this task
  no activity will be too malevolent. (AO, 345/374)

The complication in all this is the fact that it is indeed necessary Tor
desiring-production to be induced from representation, to be discovered through its lines of escape [lignes defuite]9 (AO, 346/375).
Given a certain effect, what machine could have produced it? This is
the basic question we have been taught to ask. We have also been
taught to assume that the machine producing certain effects function differently from how they are formed. The contrast with psychoanalysis is obvious. Thus there is no simple path from an effect
back to its ultimate cause. And as we've seen, all the many conceptual inventions of Anti-Oedipus are needed precisely to solve the
analytic problem presented by this very fact. Here, though, Deleuze
and Guattari show that it is the concepts of deterritorialization
and reterritorialization that offer the most effective tools for this
purpose. The basic premise of this pair of concepts is this: The
movement of deterritorialisation can never be grasped in itself, one
can only grasp its indices in relation to the territorial representations.' (AO, 347/377). These indices are desiring-machines, which
can take a variety of forms - an airplane, a train, a bicycle, sewing
machine, or whatever. The one caveat is that it must not be a person.
'Psychoanalysis, with its Oedipal stubbornness, has only a dim
understanding of this; for one reterritorialises on persons and surroundings, but one deterritorialises on machines.' (AO, 348/378).
   Take for example Andre Brink's post-apartheid novel The Rights
of Desire. The main protagonist and narrator, Ruben Olivier, a
retired librarian in his sixties, falls in love with a young woman,
Tessa Butler, who rents out his spare room. The path of their love is
not smooth. She agrees to love him only on condition that they do
not sleep together. Nonetheless she allows him to see her naked and
he is captivated by her navel ring. On his birthday, she gives him the
navel ring and he treasures it, telling himself everything will be
alright in the world so long as he has this. Predictably he loses it and
his relationship with Tessa comes to an end, though not for that
reason. Once Tessa leaves him he suddenly rediscovers the ring and
once again he feels that everything is alright with his world. But he
also notices that his world is changed; he longs to see what's outside
the confines of his big house in the suburbs where has exiled himself
for the past decade or more. It is tempting to say that Brink must

                                  119

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

have read his Deleuze, to speak like Zizek, because the reason Ruben
and Tessa break up is precisely that they recognize that their relationship is born of addiction: each is reterritorializing on the other
- she needs a father figure (perhaps) and he needs a second chance
with his deceased wife (perhaps), but either way their relationship
isn't healthy. It's too theatrical and they eventually realize it. But
even so, their coming together disrupts the little territories they'd
each carved out for themselves, sending them both on schizo
voyages. Pondering what it means to him to have known and lost
Tessa, Ruben concludes: 'I am alone now, in this tumultuous desert
where Tessa has left me after disrupting the flatness of my old world.
But I am also not alone.'69 Humming in the middle of that desert is
the little navel ring which he keeps close.
   The principal destructive task is the elimination of reterritorialization - Deleuze and Guattari depict reterritorialization as a constant threat.

  Even those who are best at 'leaving' [i.e., deterritorializing], those
  who make leaving into something as natural as being born or
  dying, those who set out in search of nonhuman sex - Lawrence,
  Miller - stake out a far-off territoriality that still forms an anthro-
  pomorphic and phallic representation: the Orient, Mexico, or
  Peru. Even the schizo's stroll or voyage does not effect great deter-
  ritorialisations without borrowing from territorial circuits: the
  tottering walk of Molloy and his bicycle preserves his mother's
  room as the vestige of a goal and so on. (AO, 346-7/376)

Our territories are our addictions, our perversions. Perversion
for Deleuze and Guattari is simply reterritorialization by another
name; it

   comprises all the types of reterritorialisations, not merely artifi-
   cial, but also exotic, archaic, residual, private, etc.: thus Oedipus
   and psychoanalysis as perversion. Even Raymond Roussel's
   schizophrenic machines turn into perverse machines in the
   theatre representing Africa. (AO, 347/377)

Undoubtedly the same could be said for the other machines we've
encountered - not just Beckett's and Roussel's, but also Artaud's,
Buchner's and Schreber's. Doubtless, too, Ruben's little navel ring

                                  120

                           READING THE TEXT

with its blood red jewel is a perverse machine too. 'In short, there is
no deterritorialisation of the flows of schizophrenic desire that is not
accompanied by global or local reterritorialisations, reterritorialisations that always reconstitute shores of representation.' (AO,
347/377). That is to say, if we can ask the question 'what does it
mean?', then we are dealing with a reterritorialization and we'll know
we've undone it when that question ceases to be possible all over
again.

   In each case we must go back by way of old lands [i.e., past reter-
   ritorializations and their resultant territories], study their nature,
   their density; we must seek to discover how the machinic indices
   are grouped on each of these lands that permit going beyond them.
   How can we reconquer the process each time, constantly resuming
   the journey on these lands - Oedipal lands of neurosis, artificial
   lands of perversion, clinical lands of psychosis? (AO, 350/380)

   The answer to this last question is simply this: the negative task of
undoing reterritorilizations must always be accompanied by the positive task of understanding how and why those reterritorializations
were constructed in the first place. Deleuze and Guattari place a
great premium on self-knowledge - but rather than asking us to get
to know our inner self, they require us to come to know how that
inner self was constituted.

                           First positive task

The first positive task consists of discovering in a subject the nature,
the formation, or the functioning of his desiring-machines, independently of any interpretations. What are your desiring-machines,
what do you put into these machines, what is the output, how does
it work, what are your nonhuman sexes?' (AO, 354/384). In order to
reach the point of being able to answer these questions the investigation must push beyond the interpretative realm - the realm in
which the question 'what does it mean?' still applies - into what
Deleuze and Guattari specify as the functional or machinic realm.
This is the case for all the machines - social, technical and desiring
- with which we fabricate our lives. Deleuze and Guattari adapt the
following rule for recognizing the parts of machines from Lacanian
psychoanalyst Serge Leclaire:

                                   121

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   the elements or parts of the desiring-machines are recognised by
   their mutual independence, such that nothing in the one depends
   or should depend on something in the other. They must not
   be opposed determinations of the same entity, nor the
   differentiations of a single being, such as the masculine and fem-
   inine in the human sex, but different or really-distinct things (des
   reellement-distincts), distinct 'beings', as found in the dispersion
   of the nonhuman sex (the clover and the bee). (AO, 355-6/386)

Unless schizoanalysis arrives at these dispersed elements of what
Leclaire referred to as the 'erogenous body', by which he meant
something of the order of what Deleuze and Guattari themselves
refer to as 'singularities' or 'intensities', that is, pre-personal, preindividual, pre-subjective, libidinally charged particles, then it hasn't
taken things far enough. Putting it more simply, it is a matter of
unearthing those particles that have been assembled, brought into a
relation of connection, disjunction and conjunction, in the absence
of an overarching link or external framing device, such as the
phallus or the organism.

   It is true that one might instead wonder how these conditions of
   dispersion, of real distinction, and of the absence of a link permit
   any machinic regime to exist - how the partial objects thus
   defined are able to form machines and arrangements of machines.
   The answer lies in the passive nature of the syntheses, or - what
   amounts to the same thing - in the indirect nature of the interac-
   tions under consideration. (AO, 357/387-8)

The 'true activities of the unconscious, causing to flow and breaking
flows, consist of the passive synthesis itself insofar as it ensures the
relative coexistence and displacement of the two different functions'
(AO, 357/388). Partial objects and the desiring-machines that mobilize them are the machinic components of the unconscious. As we
have seen, these machinic components are blocked in their operation
by a variety of different agents of repression - there is the body
without organs itself, which corresponds to what psychoanalysis
refers to as 'primary repression', then there are mechanisms of
society itself, which correspond to what psychoanalysis calls 'secondary repression' or 'repression proper'. The particular problem
here, as Deleuze and Guattari point out, is that the latter relies on

                                   122

                           READING THE TEXT

the former: thus the first essential task of schizoanalysis is to disrupt
the coincidence of the two, thus denying primary repression its reinforcement in the form of secondary repression and secondary
repression its justification in the form of primary repression. Having
done that, the schizoanalyst has to retool the relations of attraction
and repulsion that characterize the union of primary and secondary
repression in such a way as to enable the unconscious to become productive again. By this means it enables desiring-machines to renew
their operation.

                          Second positive task

The second positive task of schizoanalysis consists of reaching

   the investments of unconscious desire of the social field, insofar
   as they are differentiated from the preconscious investments of
   interest, and insofar as they are not merely capable of counter-
   acting them, but also of coexisting with them in opposite modes.
   (AO, 383/419)

What do they mean by this? Deleuze and Guattari give the example
of what they refer to as a 'generation gap' conflict between old people
who reproach the young 'for putting their desires (a car, credit, a
loan, girl-boy relationships) ahead of their interests (work, savings, a
good marriage)' (AO, 384/419). They suggest that the problem here
is that what is depicted as 'raw desire' - the desire to own a car, or
obtain a credit card, and so on - is already a mixture of desire and
interest, 'a mixture of forms of desire and of interest that are specifically reactionary and vaguely revolutionary' (AO, 384/419). In their
own words, the situation is completely 'muddled'. The question this
begs, of course, is how to unmuddle things, and thus fulfil the second
task they've put before us. Their answer is that schizoanalysis has to
use sexuality as an index of the state of things. But, and this is the
real point of this section of Anti-Oedipus, this will not work so 'long
as sexuality is kept - consciously or not - within narcissistic, Oedipal,
and castrating coordinates that are enough to ensure the triumph of
the most rigorous censors, the gray gentlemen mentioned by
Lawrence' (AO, 384-5/420). So unmuddling the tangle of desire and
interests means separating real, machinic desire from it's familialist
and masturbatory other, namely fantasy.

                                   123

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   For example, no 'gay liberation movement' is possible as long as
   homosexuality is caught up in a relation of exclusive disjunction
   with heterosexuality, a relation that ascribes them both to a
   common Oedipal and castrating stock, charged with ensuring
   only their differentiation in two noncommunicating series, instead
   of bringing to light their reciprocal inclusion and their transverse
   communication in the decoded flows of desire (included disjunc-
   tions, local connections, nomadic conjunctions). (AO, 384/420)

Sexuality cannot be liberated if it does not first of all dismantle the
mechanism of sexual difference. Deleuze and Guattari's position
regarding sexuality is radical in its simplicity. Sexual difference
would not exist, they argue, if it did not serve the interest of power.
Culturally we only observe and indeed obsess about the biological
differences between the sexes because it is in our social interest to do
so. Sexual difference is a means by which power exerts itself. The
point is that sexual liberation, whether of women or men, or homosexuals, transsexuals, and so on, is not achieved by extending 'rights'
of enjoyment to all interested parties, but by working to extinguish
the factor of interest altogether. One has to get rid of both the
problem and the solution.

   Schizoanalysis is the variable analysis of the n sexes in a subject,
   beyond the anthropomorphic representation that society imposes
   on this subject, and with which it represents its own sexuality. The
   schizoanalytic slogan of the desiring-revolution will be first of all:
   to each its own sexes. (AO, 325/352)

                               Four theses

Anti-Oedipus concludes by mapping out four theses that in sum
characterize the schizoanalytic project as a whole:

   1. Every libidinal investment of the unconscious is social and bears
      upon a sociohistorical field (AO, 375/409).
   2. There are two types of social investments: there is the unconscious
      libidinal investment of the group or desire and the preconscious
      investment of class or interest (AO, 377/411).
   3. The non-familial libidinal investments of the unconscious have primacy
      over the familial investments of the unconscious (AO, 390/427).

                                    124

                           READING THE TEXT

  4. The unconscious social investments of desire can be of two main
     types: paranoid, reactionary and fascisizing or schizoid, revolution-
     ary and Utopian (AO, 401/439).

In a very provisional fashion, we can get a sense of what a full-scale
schizoanalysis of the contemporary cultural and political scene
would amount to by using these four theses as the basic framework
for a reading of Tom Frank's bestselling and highly persuasive
account of the becoming-conservative of the US, What's the Matter
with Kansas? Appearing shortly before the 2004 US federal election,
Frank's book accurately predicted the swerve to the right that
returned George W. Bush to the White House for a second term. As
the first opportunity for the American people to rid themselves of
the hawkish Bush II regime, this election was effectively a plebiscite
on the 'War on Terror', or more particularly the conduct of US
imperialism. The electorate had before them what to an outsider's
eyes (given the US's global role, I agree with those critics who have
suggested the rest of the world should be allowed to vote in US elections) appeared to be all the evidence needed to persuade them to get
rid of Bush II: several thousand American troops had already been
killed or wounded in Iraq, the Abu-ghraib scandal had already
broken and the brutality of the incumbent's policies were there for
all Americans to see, if they cared to look. The US economy was faltering - unemployment was rising, the dollar falling, the deficit ballooning, and welfare spending shrinking - and the homeland was
anything but safe. Despite that, the Bush II regime was returned,
admittedly not by a large margin and not without the aid of some
very dodgy ballots, particularly in the all important swing-state of
Ohio.70 All of which suggests that if the electorate wasn't cynical
before the election, they were bound to become so following it.
   In such a context, one can have no difficulty understanding Slavoj
Zizek's recent theoretical move to make cynicism the cornerstone of
his analysis of the contemporary political situation, both as the essential problem to be confronted - or, rather, overcome - by any political
group with the intention of changing society; and, as the definitive
answer to the theoretical and sociological question of why the present
political situation appears so confused and ultimately why radical
change is seemingly so impossible. For him the problem is pervasive
because its core attitude - encapsulated in the phrase he borrows from
Octave Mannoni: 'Je sais bien, mais quand meme . . .' ('I know very

                                   125

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'SAA/77-OED/P(7S

well, but all the same ...')- forms the basis of all social and cultural
behaviour, not only that which entails some kind of morally suspect
action.71 He doesn't say that we are all cynics, but he does suggest that
our normal mode of being in the world requires us to disavow knowledge and this renders us susceptible to a cynical outlook. Zizek has
countless examples of the everyday disavowal of knowledge he can
point to in support of his argument: I know that the paper money in
my wallet is really worthless, but all the same I act as though it is not;
I know Santa doesn't really exist, but all the same I act as though he
does; I have no way of knowing if my bank details really are secure,
but all the same I act as though they are. Adapting Donald Rumsfeld
in an essay on the Abu-ghraib scandal, Zizek referred to this disavowed knowledge as 'the "unknown knowns", things we don't know
that we know, which is precisely the Freudian unconscious, the
"knowledge which doesn't know itself", as Lacan used to say'.72
   Ideology, for Zizek, is essentially a dual process of disavowing what
one knows while reifying a false corollary (or to put it in the language
of political spin-doctoring, 'bait and switch') - I know there are no
Weapons of Mass Destruction in Iraq, but all the same Saddam
Hussein is a terrible dictator who should be deposed. When it is put
this way, cynicism does indeed seem to explain a great deal that is perplexing about the ideological make-up of contemporary society. How
else can we explain the baffling lack of incredulity of Bush II's supporters? Conceptually, however, cynicism is subject to a law of diminishing returns. Its very premise - that 'I know very well . . .' - is
empirically insupportable. In 2004 Bush II supporters did not appear
to 'know very well' what he was likely to do as President. Certainly in
2000 they couldn't have known he would embroil them in two
unwinnable wars, ransack environmental protection laws, stretch the
national deficit to unprecedentedly high levels, or any of the other
infelicitous acts he has performed since assuming office. In 2004, when
this was known, did voters in Kansas, the subject of Tom Frank's
book, know or believe that any of these acts were wrong? Did they,
along with voters elsewhere in formerly blue but now staunchly red
states, knowingly vote to continue with the two unwinnable wars, the
ransacking of environmental protection laws, the stretching of the
national deficit to even higher levels? Or, did they vote for Bush II
hoping he would reverse things? And isn't it possible that voters balanced the issues out in a pragmatic fashion, reasoning for themselves
that although Bush II had gotten them into the war, for which they'd

                                   126

                            READING THE TEXT

like to vote against him, in all probability he is the best one to see them
through it and therefore they had to vote for him? Is such a calculation cynical?
    To speak of a 'they' in this context is obviously an analytic
fiction - the 'they' here, to speak only of the US election in question,
comprises hundreds of millions of people, not all of whom actually
voted. In fact, the non-voters vastly exceeded the voters, raising a
whole other set of questions about whether it is more or less cynical,
to give only one frame to it, to abstain from voting. These are obviously volatile issues and for good reason Tom Frank doesn't engage
with them. His focus is the much more down to earth and ultimately
much more self-interested issue of labour. We might ask, then, did
Kansas's voters know in 2004 that the Bush II regime would not
remedy their poor employment situation, but chose to believe otherwise? I single out this issue, as Tom Frank does, because in the
2000 election, in which Kansas showed its colour to be resolutely
red, it was the economy, not the war, which was the central focus
(one cannot say decisive, since it was the Supreme Court not the electorate that decided the actual outcome of the election). In all probability, the answer to this question is, no, Kansas's voters had no
such knowledge.
    It might seem appropriate, then, to revive the Marxist concept of
 'false consciousness' to explain the turn to the right in the US.
Without actually using this notion himself, Frank's account of the
political metamorphosis of Kansas from a left-leaning, pro-worker,
state to a right-wing and anti-worker state, in the space of only a few
generations is clearly underpinned by the conviction that the people
of Kansas 'know not what they do'. Not the least reason for his
thinking this way is his view that this ideological shift flies in the face
of the actual situation in Kansas which as economically depressed
as it is would seem to be crying out for some old-fashioned worker
 solidarity. The point not to be missed here, as Zizek is fond of saying,
is that they 'know not what they do' is not synonymous with 'I know
very well, but all the same. . .'. Cynicism requires a degree of awareness of wrongdoing that quite simply is not present in the Kansas
voters Frank interviews. On the contrary, they are as convinced of
their rectitude as only the self-righteous can be - they have no doubt
 in their hearts that voting against the 'permissive' liberals is the
 right thing to do, regardless of the fact that the other party hasn't
 any chance and perhaps not even the intention of overturning the

                                   127

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S AA/7Y-OED/PUS

legislation protecting the right to abortion and the other hard-won
civil rights they want withdrawn.
   We must question, too, whether it is plausible to claim that the
Kansas voters have disavowed the boundless amounts of contradictory knowledge constantly being put before them - e.g., the fact their
vote supports a party that rewards with tax breaks the very people,
namely 'decadent' Hollywood movie stars and mendacious CEOs,
they find so risible. Is it possible that they have simply failed to
process it? Are they unaware of what's going on, or fully aware but
choosing to pretend otherwise? Is it cynicism or false consciousness
that best describes their attitude? One cannot but share Frank's
incredulity that Kansas's voters could be ignorant of the Republican
Party's true agenda, namely to dismantle welfare programmes,
cripple labour organizations, reduce taxes, and generally make
things easier for big business profit-taking. Ultimately, Frank is so
amazed at the lack of awareness of Kansas voters that he cannot
help but laugh in a pitying Homer Simpson 'it is funny because it is
true' like way at the saddening irony of it all. It is, however, the
laughter of analytic despair. His tour of the state finds evidence virtually everywhere he looks that the right's agenda is anything but
beneficial to the people of Kansas. Frank wears his colours and his
heart on his sleeve, but one cannot dismiss as biased the social and
economic devastation of Middle America he witnesses - boardedup shop windows in small towns, collapsed property values, bankrupt family farms sold off to agribusiness conglomerates, job and
capital flight, taxes being spent to provide sweetheart deals for multinational corporations, grievous environmental damage, and so on.
   The cause of this devastation is open to debate only to the extent
of determining whether it was the Left or the Right that authorized
it. There can be no question that it is the handiwork of the latest
phase of capitalism. Precisely because he wears his colours so
openly, Frank is severest on the Left for the part they have had to
play in either directly causing or just as culpably failing to halt the
present slide into malaise of Middle America. Frank points an angry
finger at former President Bill Clinton, whose centrist policies he
holds directly responsible for the evisceration of the Left. In Frank's
eyes, the Democrats have become, miserably enough, simply 'the
other party that supports business'. In other words, the problem isn't
that ultimately the Right is a worse choice than the Left, but they are
both the 'worst choice' because both prioritize the market over all

                                  128

                            READING THE TEXT

other considerations. Neo-liberalism, as this market-oriented politics is usually labelled, although it is something of a misnomer since
it is neither new nor liberal in its outlook, is virtually the only choice,
regardless of which party happens to espouse it.
    If a vote for either party is a vote for business, then that vote is
really an instance of what Zizek calls 'forced choice': in the US, and
most of the West today, you can vote Left or Right, but you cannot
vote against business. The exception to this rule might seem to be the
Green parties that have risen to prominence in most Western
nations, though not in the US, in the past two decades. But a vote
for the Greens isn't a vote against business or capital, it is a vote for
the consolation of an environmentally friendly business. In Britain
and elsewhere the traditional arch-rivals of environmentalism,
namely the Conservatives, have been able to adopt Green policies
without compromising their pro-business outlook because as many
businesses have discovered, environmental legislation can be good
for the bottom line: consumers will pay more for what they perceive
to be environmentally friendly products. But as many would also
argue, this is as much a sign of their desperation as anything else.
Blair so successfully made the centrist position his own and, more
importantly, so successfully positioned the centrist outlook as the
hegemonic worldview, the Conservatives have no other choice but to
try to win support by fighting the opposition on their own turf. As
every military theorist from Sun Tzu on says, there is no more
fraught strategy than this, because it leaves you with nowhere to turn
if your gambit fails.
    Under such conditions, when there is no real choice, when neither
desire nor interest knows which way to turn, one can hardly chide
the electorate for choosing one party over the other. It is not as
though staunchly Left writers like Tom Frank think the Democrats
are actually better than the Republicans, or genuinely different from
the Republicans. Frank cleaves to an idea - or rather ideal - of the
Democrat Party embodied in the New Deal politics of the 1930s that
he himself shows has vanished from the political landscape. Frank's
conclusion that the Left has deserted its origins and turned itself
into a differently hued, but identical in all the essentials copy of the
Right, has to be read alongside his critique of the actual choices
voters make in Kansas today. It would be churlish indeed for the Left
to chastise the blue-collar voters of Kansas for not voting Democrat
when that party plainly has nothing to offer them in the way of

                                    129

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

meaningful 'workerist' policy. Its doctrine is torn straight from the
Republican Party playbook - business creates jobs, but it can't if it
is unprofitable to do so, therefore to 'save'jobs, one has to govern in
the interests of business, even when this means sacrificing such
minimal worker protection as the minimum wage, unfair dismissal
laws, occupational health and safety regulations, anti-discrimination
and harassment laws, and so forth. If business demands the installation of Third World working conditions in the First World, to save
it from 'having to' export jobs to the Third World, then so be it.
Government has, by this logic, not only made itself hostage to business, and the rest of us with it, but has become its patsy too.
   When business fails, it blames the government for strangling profitability with red tape, and then demands a bail-out package from
the public purse. And government, mindful of the political fall-out
job losses inevitably incur, tends to cave into this kind of extortion,
setting in motion a cycle it cannot get out of except via a Leninist or
Paulist gesture (actually it is an Adam Smith gesture - unprofitable
businesses should be allowed to fail according to this doctrine Wall
St espouses for others). Either government must let business go to
the wall and accept the consequences, or it must assume full responsibility for the business by taking it over. Neither is a politically
acceptable option today. So, if we are to do more than scoff at an
electorate for failing to see that it isn't acting in its own best interest
by continuing its rightward swerve, then we need to understand why
this swerve appears to be the correct choice under the conditions in
which it must be made.
   Political commentators on the Left and Right are constantly torn
between decrying the electorate as stupid for buying the slogans they
are dished up and decrying the politicians for reducing complex
issues to sound bites. We are told time and time again that this is the
reality of politics today. If a political message doesn't sound good
on the 6 o'clock news, it isn't going to get any airplay. If it can't be
compressed into a headline, the major dailies won't run with it. If it
doesn't hit a raw nerve, the shock jocks controlling talkback radio
won't get behind it. Without these three things - reportage on the
nightly news, constant headlines and talkback - you're politically
dead. Of course, it cuts both ways. As John Kerry discovered in
 2004, if you're at the wrong end of this, you can get blowtorched out
 of the race. But this just proves the rule. Kerry was never 'on
message', as the communications professionals say. Although he was

                                    130

                          READING THE TEXT

the Vietnam veteran and the other guy a draft-dodger who hid out
in the National Service and never saw a shot fired in anger, it was
Kerry that got done up in effigy and placed alongside Jane Fonda
in the pantheon of traitors who stabbed 'real Americans' in the
back.
   Tom Frank argues that it was the abandoning of Labour that
spelled the end of the Left. But I don't think this is the whole story.
It doesn't explain how the Left and Right could come to their
present state of imperceptibility. I would want to argue instead that
it was the abandonment of the Welfare State, or what Jameson has
more pointedly described as the political commitment to 'guaranteed life', that brought about its demise. If the Left is not committed
to providing a decent standard of living for all people, then what
does it stand for? Here the commitment to Labour that is an essential plank of Leftist parties actually gets in the way of the larger
commitment to 'guaranteed life' because it puts the Left in the position of having to be, among other things, anti-immigration so as to
defend wage levels from erosion due to the importation of cheap
'foreign' labour. In Australia, it was the Labor Party that inaugurated the 'White Australia' policy for precisely this reason. It mobilized xenophobia to create a protected labour market. Cynicism
doesn't explain our situation because it doesn't provide a complicated enough account of how the electorate actually thinks and
functions. Neither does false consciousness. What's needed is an
analysis that shows how desire and interest can travel in different and
indeed conflicting directions. Cynicism short-circuits the properly
schizoanalytical contradiction the separation of desire and interest
allows us to formulate and makes it seem as though it is possible to
accommodate it. And that is precisely what schizoanalytical criticism should not allow: its purpose is exactly the opposite - to constantly point up the unendurability of the present.
   Both the 'false consciousness' and 'cynicism' arguments are
underpinned by what Deleuze calls a 'philosophical illusion' -
both presume that there is a truth 'out there' somewhere which the
good citizens of Kansas are either failing to see or seeing and failing
to acknowledge. Marxist doctrine is conditioned by the Utopian
view that if awareness of the real conditions of existence becomes
general enough then social change must occur because nobody
could knowingly support capitalism as it really is. This is, in effect,
the spectre Marx said was haunting Europe, the spectre of a truth

                                  131

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

that once known cannot be tolerated. 'False consciousness' and cynicism are conjured to explain the demoralizing fact that in spite of a
century and more of consciousness-raising by the Left (in all its
manifestations) after which no one could be left in any doubt as to
the true nature of capitalist society, a spontaneous shift towards an
equitable form of socialism has not only not occurred, but the
minimal tokens of that Utopia (such as the minimum wage, the
public health system, old-age pension, and so on) are under threat
of extinction. It is the schism between knowledge ('I know capitalism is an inequitable system') and action ('but all the same'), or lack
thereof, as the case may be, that false consciousness and cynicism
attempt to explain. They reason that if we knew the truth about our
situation we would be compelled to act, therefore the fact that we do
not act must mean we have disavowed the truth either by suppressing all knowledge of it from ourselves or by choosing not to
acknowledge its implications. What we must prevent at all costs is
cynicism becoming this new truth that is always already out there,
because if that happens political thought, not to mention political
action, is finished. The problem today is that while citizens as consumers can be motivated to complain or change brands, it is all but
impossible to persuade them to act. Cynicism doesn't explain this
state of affairs, it excuses it. In this sense, cynicism is the new name
for what Foucault called fascism, as such Anti-Oedipus' message is
as vital and urgent today as it was when it was first published.

                                  132

                            CHAPTER 4

             RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE

The reception of Anti-Oedipus has largely been decided by how well
particular commentators have been able to cope with its infamously
playful language. This is equally true of both the affirmative and the
negative responses. Deleuze and Guattari enthusiasts can be just as
muddled in their apprehension of Anti-Oedipus as the detractors.
The difficulty of the rhetoric of Anti-Oedipus is such that it is an
achievement in itself just to understand what they are trying to say.
But this means figuring out what they are saying has taken priority
over whether what they are saying is valid, cogent and indeed worth
saying. There is in this respect little that has been written about
Deleuze and Guattari that is genuinely critical, where that would
mean evaluating their project from a position of understanding and
determining its relative strengths and weaknesses. It is really only
Deleuze and Guattari's detractors, those thinkers like Manfred
Frank and Perry Anderson who regard schizoanalysis as wrongheaded, who tend to take this crucial step and inquire just what it is
that Deleuze and Guattari have contributed to critical theory. But
unfortunately, as I will briefly show, they do so from a position that
is anything but adequate in its grasp of the complexities of their
thought. On the other side of the coin, I hasten to add, the thinkers
who have decided that Deleuze and Guattari's thought represents an
advance on all other forms of thought tend not to see any need to
defend their view, nor evaluate its premises. In the dozens of books
that have been written about Deleuze and Guattari's work there are
plenty of accounts of the superiority of their thought in relation to
various other forms of thought, but too often these are straw figures
projected out of Deleuze and Guattari's own work, such as the
proverbial bogeyman the dialectic. This book will have achieved its

                                 133

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

purpose if by cutting through its heady rhetoric it has established the
platform for a genuine critique of Anti-Oedipus.
   The story of the reception of Anti-Oedipus needs to be stratified
in two ways - firstly, there is an intergenerational split between
Deleuze and Guattari's contemporaries and their students, the
former tending to be cooler than the latter in their response; secondly, the response has varied from nation to nation, the furthest
from France tending to be more enthusiastic than those closest to
home.1 Even today, there are more Deleuzians in Sydney than Paris.
Deleuze and Guattari were undoubtedly a cause celebre in France,
particularly as Anti-Oedipus seemed to revive the spirit of May '68,
but it was the intense international reception of their work that
transformed them both into academic superstars. The number of
books and articles on their work written in English far exceeds the
number written in French (admittedly this number is artificially
boosted by a new trend in the European academy, particularly in
Scandinavian countries, to write in English regardless of the actual
national language of origin). There is perhaps a third stratification
that should be added here and that is the gap or rivalry between disciplines. As Fredric Jameson reminds us, what we know today as
'theory', an amorphous body of work that includes Deleuze and
Guattari, first took root in Anglophone countries in French departments and not in the English, Philosophy or Cultural Studies
departments where they are read today.2 In the case of Australia,
probably the most Deleuzified of any country, these three factors
combined to produce a national explosion of Deleuzism: a brace of
young scholars from the backblocks of Australia (among them, Rosi
Braidotti, Anna Gibbs, Meaghan Morris, Stephen Muecke and Paul
Patton) were drawn to France in the 1970s by the sense that something intellectually important was happening there, something more
exciting than was available to them at home. After spending a year
or more in Paris studying with Deleuze, Derrida, Foucault, Lyotard
and others, these scholars returned home and radicalized the
Australian academy, making it a veritable hotbed of theory.3
   For a long time, the French reception of Anti-Oedipus was dominated by the jaundiced account given of it in Vincent Descombes La
Meme et L'Autre, first published in 1979 and translated a year later
under the deceptive title of Modern French Philosophy. Descombes
brands Deleuze and Guattari 'philosophers of desire' (a label that
has stuck, mostly for the worse) and claims that Anti-Oedipus is

                                  134

                       RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE

primarily Nietzschean in inspiration. This (mis-)apprehension has
been highly influential, particularly with Deleuze and Guattari's
critics who tend to see this as reason enough to dismiss them without
bothering to read Anti-Oedipus for themselves to see if Descombes'
claim holds water. Using concepts drawn from Deleuze's book on
Nietzsche published a decade before Anti-Oedipus, Descombes
rewrites its argument in binary terms as an oscillation between reactive desire and active desire, failed revolutionaries or slaves on the
one hand and authentic revolutionaries or masters on the other. He
further claims that Deleuze and Guattari consign the concept of
class struggle to the museum, thus evacuating Marx from their
project altogether.4 That this latter point is patently false I hope is
clear. As we've already seen, Anti-Oedipus reinvigorates the concept
of class struggle by linking it to desire and thus confronting the issue
of how class solidarity comes about in the first place, or, as is more
often the case fails to do so in spite of apparent need. If there is a
binary in Anti-Oedipus it is between the concepts of desire and interest, which Deleuze and Guattari oppose in their account of the
desire for oppression. The more damaging point, though, is the
former one, which is in effect an accusation of idealism - and indeed,
Descombes doesn't shy away from saying this directly.5 Deleuze's
Nietzschean affiliations are well known, and as I have shown,
Nietzsche is important to Anti-Oedipus, but only insofar as his concepts further the materialist agenda of the project as a whole. I
would suggest Nietzsche is deployed to intensify Marx, not negate
him, and that it is always a revolutionary Marx who occupies centre
stage in Anti-Oedipus. What Anti-Oedipus asks us to do, ultimately,
is examine ourselves and understand our own inertia in the face of
an egregious social system. It is Marx who demands we examine
society in a systemic manner, and it is Nietzsche who demands that
we recognize the degree to which society is a reflection of our desire.6
   In France today the reception of Anti-Oedipus continues to be
divided along the battle lines I mentioned above. Former students of
Deleuze, like Eric Alliez, battle inconclusively with his former contemporaries, like Alain Badiou, one defending the purity of Deleuze
and Guattari's thought, the other the purity of thought itself.7
Badiou is largely dismissive of Anti-Oedipus, preferring to concentrate his attack on Deleuze's more overtly philosophical works.8 This
battle has its ugly side, as I've noted already, inasmuch that Guattari
tends to be blamed for all the obscure passages in their collaborative

                                  135

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

works. He is held up by Badiou, in particular, as the great corruptor
or contaminator of Deleuze, the one who turned him away from the
pure path of philosophy. Ironically enough, if this has any truth in
it, then it would mean Guattari deflected Deleuze away from the
pursuit of a pure Niezschean line toward a more synthetic and
overtly Marxian line. Slavoj Zizek uses this demonstrably false
dichotomy between a good non-Guattarized Deleuze and a bad
Guattarized Deleuze as the principal pivot of his book, Organs
without Bodies, arguing that the former got himself into a philosophical hole that the latter failed to extricate him from. The
dichotomy is false, as I've tried to show, because the theoretical
backbone of Anti-Oedipus was constructed by Deleuze in his earlier
books, particularly Difference and Repetition? There is in effect a
real continuity between the so-called good and bad Deleuze and not
the split that Badiou and Zizek contend. Ultimately the 'two
Deleuzes thesis' is like Deng Xiaoping's famous evaluation of Mao
as 70 per cent good and 30 per cent bad, a way of selectively dealing
with a powerful predecessor whose continuing influence is such that
they cannot simply be dismissed. It enables Badiou and Zizek to
accommodate themselves to that part of his philosophical legacy
which conforms with their own take on things, particularly his rereadings of Nietzsche and Spinoza, while setting aside those aspects
which would challenge their position without actually having to
negate them in a theoretical sense. None of which should be taken
to mean that interesting work on Deleuze and Guattari is not taking
place in France right now, I hasten to add, only that (to the outsider
at least) it seems to be oscillating in an oddly Oedipal fashion
between the desire to save the father and the desire to kill him once
and for all.
   The German reception of Anti-Oedipus, much like the French
reception, was for a similarly long time dominated by the work of a
single author, namely philosopher and literary critic Manfred Frank,
a student of the great hermeneuticist Hans Georg Gadamer.10
Unfortunately, as with Descombes, Frank's influence was profoundly
negative. His account of Anti-Oedipus had the effect of stifling at
birth practically all interest in Deleuze and Guattari's work in
Germany for well over a decade.11 Its influence undoubtedly owes to
the fact that unlike his contemporaries in the German academy, particularly Jurgen Habermas, Frank does not simply despatch Deleuze
and Guattari with a single contemptuous line, but devotes four

                                 136

                       RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE

lengthy chapters to them in his tirade against all that has gone wrong
in critical theory since the start of the Trench era' (as Jameson
describes it), What is Neostructuralism?, which first appeared in
German in 1984. His other targets are Jacques Lacan, Michel
Foucault, Jacques Derrida and Jean-Frangois Lyotard, all of whom
he tars with the same brush as irrationalist thinkers who commit the
folly of trying to conceive of an a-subjective philosophy, or a philosophy that isn't centred on a subject. Frank correctly interprets
Deleuze and Guattari's work as building on the work of Foucault
and Lacan, but rather than see this as a progressive development he
sees it as evidence of a loss of reason. In his view Foucault and Lacan
are already bad, that is already irrational, therefore building on their
work is to take irrationality to new lengths. But for Frank the
problem isn't simply that Deleuze and Guattari's work is philosophically incoherent, it goes deeper than that. The popularity of Deleuze
and Guattari's work troubles him and in his view can only be
lamented as the 'symptom of a crisis' which he describes as the
spreading discontent, particularly in the younger generation, 'in the
contemporary condition of our souls and our culture'.12 He thus
makes their work emblematic for all that is wrong with critical theory
today and in this way fails to do the very thing he urges his readers
to do, which is 'to seriously accept' the 'challenge' of their thought.13
   Frank clearly finds Anti-Oedipus heavy going. At one point he
admits that its rhetoric is inaccessible to him and at another that he
isn't sure why a particular term (molecular) is used.14 Consequently
we aren't surprised when he fails to perceive the distinction
between pathological and non-pathological instances of desiringproduction. He thus accuses Deleuze and Guattari of 'neovitalism'
for infusing machines with life, but as we have seen, this is not at all
Deleuze and Guattari's position.15 It is only the schizophrenic in the
full flight of their illness that perceives the world this way and what's
more it is a sign of the presence of the illness that they see the world
this way. In spite of his numerous misreadings of Anti-Oedipus -
which I won't list precisely because they are so numerous - Frank
nevertheless raises a crucial question, one that has troubled most if
not all politically conscious readers of Deleuze and Guattari: in
whose name do the authors fight?16 Perry Anderson's fear that
Deleuze and Guattari have pulverized the subject is emblematic of a
deep concern amongst the more strategically oriented critics that in
fact Deleuze and Guattari speak for no one and nothing. The most

                                   137

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4/V7Y-OED/PUS

extreme version of this was the initial feminist response, led by Luce
Irigaray and reinforced by Alice Jardine, that having dismembered
the body, Deleuze and Guattari had destroyed the very source of a
feminist politics, namely corporeally situated sexual difference.17 A
body construed only as a loose coalition of disconnected, libidinalized parts is, feminist scholars feared, unable to give rise to a feminist
politics, and in that sense can only be construed as a continuation of
patriarchal theory as usual. Marxist scholars like Alex Callinicos
latched onto Deleuze's Nietzschean past and interpreted AntiOedipus as an exercise in perspectivism, or what amounts to the
same thing (for Callinicos at any rate), extreme relativism.18 But this
is neither a good interpretation of Deleuze and Guattari nor a good
interpretation of Nietzsche. If, as Jameson has argued, Hegel is a
codeword in French critical theory for Stalin, then one wonders what
Nietzsche is a codeword for in Anglo-American critical theory
because there is no greater insult in its lexicon than the label
'Nietzschean'.19 If Callinicos' usage is anything to go by, I suspect it
stands for 'primitivist', which in the Marxist logic of stages (in which
the primitive necessarily precedes capital), actually amounts to
saying someone is 'proto-capitalist'. This would be consistent with
2izek's reading of Deleuze and Guattari as the ideologists of late
capitalism.
   As is so often the case with charismatic figures, as testimony from
former students and colleagues assure us Deleuze and Guattari
were, one needs to get away from them in order to think clearly,
which perhaps explains why it was the students from abroad - Rosi
Braidotti, Michael Hardt, Eugene Holland, Brian Massumi, Paul
Patton and others - who have proven to be the most significant
exponents of their work. But with the signal exception of Holland,
who has written an introduction to Anti-Oedipus, this generation
of Deleuze scholars has tended to favour A Thousand Plateaus
rather than Anti-Oedipus. Indicatively, Massumi's User's Guide to
Capitalism and Schizophrenia gives scant attention to Anti-Oedipus
and for the most part assumes that A Thousand Plateaus is a recapitulation and dare I say a sublation of its prequel. The second generation of Deleuze scholars - the scholars who followed the path
blazed by Braidotti, Hardt, Holland, Massumi and Patton - such as
myself, but also Claire Colebrook, Manuel DeLanda, Gregg
Lambert, as well as many others, have tended to do the same thing
(I am speaking very generally). The point I want to make here, in

                                   138

                      RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE

conclusion, is that insofar as we conflate Anti-Oedipus with A
Thousand Plateaus, we obscure the fact that Anti-Oedipus is a
revolutionary book, whereas A Thousand Plateaus is not. In 1972
Deleuze and Guattari wanted to change society, almost at any cost;
but by 1980, when the second volume appeared, they had pulled
back from their previous radical stance, and where before they'd said
change by any means necessary, now they asked for restraint. Near
to the end of his life, in L'Abecedaire, Deleuze explained that he'd
seen too many of his students die and felt that he somehow had to
caution them against extreme action. But the radical project of AntiOedipus should not be allowed to disappear this way into the
miasma of regret for the shattered lives and broken dreams of a
handful of individuals. Its project was and remains to change society
as a whole by questioning why we have allowed and indeed actively
desired it to be the way it is. The truth it proclaims is that we have
the society we deserve and that if we would have things otherwise
then it is up to us to use our desire to make things different from how
they are. Anti-Oedipus is a Utopian book in the strictest sense: it
offers a blueprint for a different world, not by describing that world
in fantastic terms, but by showing the way out of this one. And that
remains a worthwhile but incomplete project.20

                                  139

                                 NOTES

                1. DELEUZE AND GUATTARI IN CONTEXT

 1 Anderson 1983: 39.
 2 Anderson 1983: 51.
 3 Anderson 1983: 27.
 4 Jameson 1990: 4.
 5 Badiou 2005: 136.
 6 Reported in the International News section of The Guardian, 5 May
   2007, p. 21.
 7 Nadaud2006: 12.
 8 Negri 2004: 46.
 9 For an excellent discussion of this apparent contradiction in Deleuze's
   approach to 'praxis' see Thoburn 2003: 35-7.
10 He was involved in GIF for instance and later spoke out against the
   treatment of Palestinians, as well as the first Gulf War.
11 It is now available on DVD.
12 Of those students, Deleuze said: 'I never told that audience what they
   meant to me, what they gave me. [. . .] It was like an echo chamber, a
   feedback loop, in which an idea reappeared after going, as it were,
   through various filters. It was there I realised how much philosophy
   needs not only a philosophical understanding, through concepts, but a
   nonphilosophical understanding, rooted in percepts and affects. You
   need both.'(D, 139/191).
13 Pinhas also used Deleuze's voice in other ways, combining it with music
   to produce Deleuze-inspired electronica of a peculiarly haunting variety.
14 Interestingly enough, Guattari described himself as being heavily influ-
   enced by Sartre, even going so far as to admit certain concepts like deter-
   ritorialization are simply Sartre's in disguise.
15 Tournier 1988: 128.
16 Negri 2004:46. As Negri records here, it was Guattari who arranged for
   Negri's relocation from Italy to France in the early 1980s with the help
   of Amnesty International. They collaborated on a variety of political
   projects, including an ultimately forlorn but important attempt to forge

                                     140

                                   NOTES

   an alliance between the Reds and the Greens, and produced a manifesto,
   Communists Like Us: New Spaces of Liberty, New Lines of Alliance
   (1985), which foreshadows many of themes Negri would take up in his
   collaborative work with Michael Hardt, especially Empire (2000).
17 For a detailed analysis of this publication see Genosko 2007. The full text
   of the journal can now be viewed on the web at: www.criticalsecret.com/
   n8/quer/4per/pedo/01 .htm.
18 For a more detailed account of Oury's work, see the important inter-
   view: The Hospital is 111' (Oury 2007).
19 Reflecting on the meeting with Lacan to discuss Anti-Oedipus, Guattari
   wrote in his diary that he felt something had broken between them (AOP,
   344/not included in French edition).
20 Nadaud 2006.
21 Genosko 2002: 16.
22 'May '68 was the largest mass movement in French history, the biggest
   strike in the history of the French workers' movement [involving some
   9 million workers], and the only "general" insurrection the overdevel-
   oped world has known since World War II. It was the first general strike
   that extended beyond the traditional centres of industrial production to
   include workers in the service industries, the communication and culture
   industries - the whole sphere of social reproduction. No professional
   sector, no category of worker was unaffected by the strike; no region,
   city, or village in France was untouched.' (Ross 2002: 4).
23 Ross 2002: 6.
24 'May '68 came as a shock to Gilles and me, as to many others: we didn't
   know each other, but this book, now, is nevertheless a result of May.'
   (N, 15/26).
25 Ross 2002: 106; 116.
26 For a more contemporary example one might think of the anti-World
   Trade Organisation protest in Seattle in November 1999, which (though
   not on the scale of May '68) famously united blue collar workers and
   environmentalists in protest against what they rightly saw as the instau-
   ration of a new world order determined to make the whole planet con-
   genial to the business interests of the major powers. See Buchanan and
   Parr 2006: 11-14.
27 Similarly they rejected as pointless the shrill demand for self-criticism
   the Maoists made, arguing that it did nothing to engage power as it actu-
   ally functions. As Deleuze put it, 'in May 1968 the leftists lost a lot of
   time insisting that professors engage in public self-criticism as agents of
   bourgeois ideology. It's stupid, and it simply fuels the masochistic
   impulses of academics.' (CY, 56).
28 They certainly didn't share the view of commentators like Raymond
   Aron and (much more recently) Pierre Nora who declared that nothing
   happened that May. Nor would they go along with the New
   Philosophers' attempt a decade later to bury the memory of May '68
   altogether. See Ross 2002: 67; 171.
29 Thus, I have to disagree with Peter Hallward (2006: 7) when he argues
   rather that Deleuze's work has little to offer politically speaking because

                                     141

                   DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S AA/77-OED/PUS

   Deleuze fails to live up to Marx's dictum that philosophy should not
   simply try to understand society, it should try to change it as well. In my
   view, he caricatures Deleuze as a contemplative philosopher whose
   thought somehow resists doing what needs to be done. For Deleuze, the-
   oretical work is in itself a political act because it creates new conditions
   for thought and there is no more potent formula for change than the
   changing of ideas and attitudes. In this regard, Deleuze's political
   thought is compatible with the positions outlined by Holloway (2005)
   and George (2004).
30 As Ronald Bogue (1989: 6) observes the renown of Anti-Oedipus was
   something of a double-edged sword. Deleuze and Guattari 'became
   symbols of anti-psychiatry and the spirit of May, and as a result the
   broader concerns that informed Anti-Oedipus were often ignored'.
31 Jameson 1990: 5.
32 Ross 2002: 95.
33 Ross 2002: 95.
34 The reference is to Robert Musil's Der Mann ohne Eigenschaften (The
   Man Without Qualities) which, as Deleuze notes, recalls Pierre and
   Isabel in Herman Melville's Pierre, or the Ambiguities (CC, 74). For a
   more detailed consideration the incestuous pair in Musil and Melville
   from a Deleuzian perspective, see Buchanan 2000: 93-116.
35 Ross 2002: 26.
36 Ross 2002:38.
37 Fields 1984: 149.
38 Dine 1994: 220.
39 Fields 1984: 151.
40 Ross 2002: 80.
41 Ross 2002: 91.
42 Elsewhere, I argue that this is the essential lesson to be drawn from the
   US invasion of Iraq in 2003 (Buchanan 2006c: 25).
43 Ross 2002: 91. On a practical level, too, it was the anti-Vietnam groups,
   like the CVN and CVB, both of which formed in 1967, which provided
   the organizational nuclei that helped escalate May '68 from a localized
   student protest to nationwide strike.
44 As Nicholas Thoburn (2003) has demonstrated, the workers' movements
   in Italy were very important to Deleuze and Guattari.
45 Ross 2002: 130.
46 Jameson 1994.
47 Ross 2002: 170.

                         2. OVERVIEW OF THEMES

 1 Baudrillard 1987: 39.
 2 See Hardt 1993: 104-7.
 3 A different translation of this piece can also be found in Foucault (1977).
 4 It is worth noting here that Foucault's book on prisons, Discipline and
   Punish, had not yet appeared. Moreover, when it was finally published

                                      142

                                    NOTES

   three years after Anti-Oedipus it carried a footnote expressing a significant
   debt to the work of Deleuze and Guattari. See Foucault 1975: 309n2.
 5 Cockburn 2006: 82-99.
 6 Klein 2000: 281.
 7 Klein 2000: 76.
 8 Frank 1997: 185-204.
 9 This is perhaps the moment to say something in reply to Slavoj Zizek's
   (2004: 183-192) provocative suggestion that Deleuze is the ideologist of
   late capitalism. He offers two points in justification of this claim: firstly,
   citing Jean-Jacques Lecercle's amusing anecdote of witnessing a yuppie
   reading Deleuze and Guattari on a train and imagining their bewilder-
   ment, Zizek asks us to contemplate the opposite scenario of a yuppie
   reading Deleuze and Guattari on a train and recognizing in it several
   existential imperatives already familiar to him. If one were to accept this
   reasoning, that Deleuze and Guattari are ideologists of late capitalism
   by virtue of the fact that some of their readers happen to find confir-
   mation of their capitalist worldview in their work, then we'd have to jet-
   tison practically every thinker and writer on the Left because nobody
   has taken the Left's emphasis on labour, value and capital, more seri-
   ously than the Right. Indeed, it is precisely the neo-liberals who most
   fully embrace Althusser's famous doctrinal claim that the ultimate deter-
   mining instance is the economic. Was this not what Margaret Thatcher
   meant by her infamous slogan There is no alternative'? Secondly,
   he claims that the book Netocracy, written by two Swedish writers
   Alexander Bard and Jan Soderqvist, is inspired by Deleuze and Guattari
   and that means that Deleuze and Guattari are ideologists of late capi-
   talism. Even if we accept the rather dubious claim that this book which
   only cites Deleuze and Guattari a handful of times is inspired by their
   work, that is not by itself sufficient to justify the conclusion that Deleuze
   and Guattari would endorse its contents. Zizek's second exhibit is thus
   fashioned in the same way as the first, and though it scarcely seems pos-
   sible it is even less convincing. If one were to accept this line of argument
   one would have to set aside the very idea of criticism itself. It would
   mean in effect that every text written in the name of, or inspired by a
   master thinker like Deleuze, but also 2izek as well, is an irreducible
   judgement on that thinker. If that were the case then every bad article I
   read claiming to be inspired by Zizek's work has to be read as a judge-
   ment on him too. That he is unwilling to accept this position (as I am) is
   blatantly apparent in his many rejoinders to Judith Butler, Michael
   Hardt and Toni Negri, and especially Ernesto Laclau.
10 For an exhaustive account of the influences on and sources of Deleuze
   and Guattari's conception of the unconscious, albeit one that takes the
    strange decision to give relatively little attention to Anti-Oedipus, see
   Kerslake (2007).
11 Freud 1991: 199.
12 Lacan's essay The Freudian Thing', included in Ecrits, provides an
   important gloss of the problems involved in this particular translation.
    See Lacan 2006: 347.

                                      143

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

13 See the 'Editor's Introduction' to Freud's essay The Ego and the Id' in
   Freud 1991: 345.
14 Todd May (2005: 121) takes precisely this line in his discussion of
   Deleuze and Guattari's concept of machines.
15 Freud 1991: 397.
16 See Freud 1991: 206-7.
17 Freud 1976: 364.
181 examine this issue from a different angle in Buchanan 2000: 175-6.
19 Freud 1979: 186-9.
20 This is why Bettelheim remains important to Deleuze and Guattari in
   spite of his obvious bias toward an Oedipal or pre-Oedipal interpreta-
   tion of the cause of schizophrenia, and the blame he heaps upon parents
   as a result. Bettelheim (1967: 316) reinterprets the Oedipal myth as a
   warning to parents that if they don't stay in touch with their children, if
   they blind their children to the truth of existence, then they will wind up
   like Oedipus. In spite of his Freudian predilection, Bettelheim is
   nonetheless willing to admit to the idea that schizophrenia is an
   autonomous productive force in its own right, which in full flight owes
   little to the actions of the parents (AO, 40/45).
21 See Freud 1979.

                          3. READING THE TEXT

 1 See Anderson 1983: 55.
 2 Laingl990:41.
 3 Biichner 1993: 142.
 4 As an aside, we may note that this impression of schizophrenia is of a
   piece with Fredric Jameson's conception of modernism (as the essential
   precursor to postmodernism) as it is summed up in the marvellous quote
   from Rimbaud concerning the magical flowers 'that look back at you'
   (Jameson 1991: 10). It is probably worth adding, on this score, that
   Jameson's conception of schizophrenia, which he associates with post-
   modernity, is derived from Lacan not Deleuze and Guattari. See
   Buchanan 2000: 159-64.
 5 Zizekl991: 109-11.
 6 Hardt and Negri 2000: 214-18.
 7 A preliminary working out of the essential components of the three syn-
   theses of time are to be found in Deleuze's earlier books, particularly
   Bergonism (chapters 3 and 4) and Proust and Signs (chapter 5). Cinema 1
   and Cinema 2 are the extension of these syntheses to their logical limits.
 8 Symptomatically, there is no entry for passive synthesis in either Gilles
   Deleuze: Key Concepts, edited by Charles Stivale, or in the glossary
   appended to Mark Bonta and John Protevi's Deleuze and Geophilosophy:
   A Guide and Glossary. But see Keith Faulkner's, Deleuze and the Three
   Syntheses of Time, Jay Lampert's Deleuze and the Philosophy of History,
   and James Williams' account of the three syntheses of time in Gilles
   Deleuze's Difference and Repetition.

                                     144

                                     NOTES

 9 Hallward 2006: 162.
10 This is a complex issue, and not one I can do justice to here. I deal with
   this problematic more fully in Buchanan 2000: 73-89.
11 As will become clear in what follows, Brian Massumi's (1992: 56) defin-
   itions of both active and passive synthesis as 'evaluations' is inaccurate.
   They are not as he says 'approximate terms', but real and distinct
   processes locked in mutual presupposition. Massumi correctly identifies
   that something - his example is the wind - may be passive in one context
   and active in another, but overlooks the more important fact that every-
   thing is first of all passive in relation to itself, and then active in relation
   to the external world.
12 Arrighi 1994: 5.
13 This is why in recent decades throughout most of the developed world,
   capital has either pulled out of manufacturing altogether and embraced
   what some people call the 'knowledge' or 'information' economy, or
   relocated its operations to the Third World, thus relieving itself of the
   impediment to profitability presented by the relatively inflexible labour
   and regulatory environment of the First World.
14 Arrighi 1994: 6.
15 This is why Deleuze and Guattari argue that the limits of capital are
   immanent: capital constantly pushes up against its limits, and may from
   time to time enter into periods of crisis, but somehow it always manages
   to reset its limits and persevere.
16 Marx 1976: 874-5.
17 Marx 1976: 875.
18 Marx 1976: 875.
19 Marx 1976: 451.
20 Marx 1976: 451.
21 Althusser 1971: 133.
22 Althusser 1971:171-2.
23 Davis 2006: 185.
24 Davis 2006: 80.
25 As Zizek points out, God's gift of freedom to humanity is an example
   par excellence of the paradox of the 'forced choice': 'Man is given
   freedom - with the expectation that he will not (mis)use it to break free
   from the Creator, that is, to become really free.' (Zizek 2006: 96).
26 Althusser 1971: 219.
27 To which they add: 'As if every great doctrine were not a combined for-
   mation, constructed from bits and pieces, various intermingled codes
   and flux, partial elements and derivatives, that constitute its very life or
   its becoming. As if we could reproach someone for having an ambigu-
   ous relationship with psychoanalysis, without first mentioning that psy-
   choanalysis owes its existence to a relationship, theoretically and
   practically ambiguous, with what it discovers and the forces that it
   wields.'(AO, 128/140).
28 'Retention is the primary function of the family: it is a matter of learn-
   ing what elements of desiring-production the family is going to reject,
   what it is going to retain, what it is going to direct along the dead-end

                                       145

                    DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   roads leading to its own undifferentiated (the miasma), and what on the
   contrary it is going to lead down the paths of a contagious and repro-
   ducible differentiation. For the family creates at the same time its dis-
   graces and its honours, the nondifferentiation of its neurosis and the
   differentiation of its ideal, which are distinguishable only in appear-
   ance.'(AO, 136/148).
29 We will consider practical implications of the legitimate and illegitimate
   uses of the three syntheses in more detail in the next section.
30 Badiou 2000:11-12.1 should add that Deleuze and Guattari themselves
   describe the phallus as being like 'the One in negative theology' (AO,
   67/70).
31 Ironically, if one were to grant that such a thing as 'penis envy' existed,
   then it would be men not women who suffer from it the most severely,
   because while men 'have' a penis already and women do not, it is never
   adequate in their eyes, never adequate to protect them from the neces-
   sity of having to assume a passive attitude towards other men. The cas-
   trating effect of the phallus is in this sense doubled: men not only fear
   its loss, but also have the feeling that it is already lost (that it is a useless
   'surplus').
32 Although they don't discuss methods for doing this here, they do insist
   that 'in place of the benevolent pseudo neutrality of the Oedipal analyst,
   who wants and understands only daddy and mommy, we must substi-
   tute a malevolent, an openly malevolent activity: your Oedipus is a
   fucking drag, keep it up and the analysis will be stopped, or else we'll
   apply a shock treatment to you!' (AO, 123/134).
33 I discuss this example at greater length in Buchanan 2006d: 60-3.
34 Jameson 1992: 26.
35 Zizek2001: 134.
36 I am referring here to Zizek's (1991: 104) experiment of imagining
   Hitchcock's The Birds without any birds.
37 In this way, 'we pass from detachable partial objects to the detached com-
   plete object, from which global persons derive by an assigning of lack'
   (AO, 81/87).
38 Acting together or for the sake of individual survival is not collective
   action and should not be mistaken for action undertaken for the sake
   of the common good. In terms of Alain Badiou's ethics, this type of
   survivalist collective action corresponds to the evil of 'simulacra' or
   what he also calls 'terror' because it mimics genuine common good col-
   lective action, and speaks in the name of the common cause, but its
   intentions are otherwise. Under the guise of a desire for common cause,
   what is in fact realized is the desire for a common enemy. Badiou 2001:
   72-7.
39 Interestingly enough, Deleuze does not draw this conclusion himself in
   his books on cinema, despite the fact that his mapping of the narrative
   logic of prewar cinema, particularly film noir, is motivated by lack. The
   notions of the small and large form, SAS' and ASA', are both motivated
   by lack - in the first example, something is lacking in the situation which
   demands an action to rectify it, and in the second something is lacking

                                        146

                                    NOTES

   in an action and this gives rise to an unsatisfactory situation demanding
   a changed action. See Cl, 182-8/243-50.
40 On a related point, it also explains Deleuze's famous distaste for the
   question and answer mode of interviews and his insistence on the need
   for philosophers to be allowed to pose their own questions.
41 Jameson 1981:58.
42 As readers of What is Philosophy? will be aware, Deleuze and Guattari's
   final project was devoted to overcoming what they both saw as the
   tyranny of opinion.
43 Jameson 1981:59.
44 Jameson 1981:217.
45 Jameson 1981: 117.
46 Jameson 1981: 114.
47 Jameson 1981:201.
48 Badiou (2005:136) suggests that such moments in history might usefully
   be termed Thermidorean'.
49 Conrad 2000: 304.
50 Conrad 2000: 209.
51 Conrad 2000: 100.
52 DeLanda2006: 10-19.
53 The importance of this omission will become clearer in the next section
   when I discuss the capture of desire.
54 This will perhaps surprise those readers of Deleuze and Guattari who
   see this concept as a site of experimentation or freedom. But these two
   perspectives are not mutually incompatible - selection, which is the
   supreme function of the body without organs, must by definition mean
   actively choosing between an array of options, with some being taken
   and others passed over. It is this capacity for repression that Deleuze and
   Guattari seize upon in their explanation of the formation of social
   machines.
55 Indeed, as readers of A Thousand Plateaus would be aware, one could
   not begin to understand the concept of becoming without them. By the
   same token, what is the rhizome if it is not a valorization of alliance over
   affiliation?
56 This structure is preserved in contemporary Western mythologizations
   of love, particularly in popular music, wherein we give our love to the
   person who stole our heart.
57 Marx 1976: 103. For an extended discussion of this point see Buchanan
   2000: 17-19.
58 Marx 1973:102. Deleuze and Guattari cite this passage themselves (AO,
   240-1/261), but the English translation does not agree with the English
   source the translators cite, i.e., the source I have cited, so for that reason
   I have gone directly to the source.
59 Jameson 1988b: 25. For a useful discussion and extension of Jameson's
   concept, see Zizek 2002: 182-8.
60 Naomi Klein describes this situation as 'one-way strip poker' whereby
   'the United States and Europe - via the World Bank, the International
   Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organisation - tell the developing

                                       147

                   DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   world, "You take down your trade barriers and we'll keep ours up"'.
   (Klein 2007: 10).
61 'Debt repayments today represent a substantial net transfer of wealth
   from the working poor of the Third World to the coffers of international
   finance capital.' Parenti 1995: 21.
62 For instance, the housing booms that have (periodically) gripped most of
   the First World nations in the past two decades are compelling proof of
   the accuracy of this insight. By lowering interest rates and thereby
   increasing the affordability of borrowing, banks have fuelled a desire for
   housing at once expansionist and proprietorial that has paradoxically
   reduced the affordability of housing itself by pushing up prices at expo-
   nential rate. Mortgages dominate the national agendas of First World
   countries and no issue - not even an illegal, unjust war - is more import-
   ant to their electorates than the need to maintain low interest rates at a
   steady state. Despite the very real personal gains made by some housing
   investors, and the equally real penalties those excluded from the market
   must endure, the housing boom has not and cannot close the gap between
   the two types of money. For more on this topic from a Deleuzian point
   of view, see Buchanan 2006d: 144-8.
63 Parenti 1995: 6-14.
64 'Marx's once scandalous thesis that governments are simple business
   agents for international capital is today an obvious fact on which "lib-
   erals" and "socialists" agree. The absolute identification of politics with
   the management of capital is no longer the shameful secret hidden
   behind the "forms" of democracy; it is the openly declared truth by
   which our governments acquire legitimacy.' (Ranciere 1999: 113). Or, as
   Deleuze and Guattari themselves put it: 'Never before has a State lost so
   much of its power in order to enter with so much force into the service
   of the signs of economic power.' (AO, 274/300).
65 The 'axiomatic is not the invention of capitalism, since it is identical with
   capital itself. On the contrary, capitalism is its offspring, its result.
   Capitalism merely ensures the regulation of the axiomatic . . .' (AO,
   274/300).
66 Ranciere 1999: 110.
67 'Sadly, psychologists have shown that, whereas depression is prominent
   among first-generation immigrants who experience adaptational
   difficulties, schizophrenia predominates among maladjusted second-
   generation migrants. Such youth turn to Islamism in order to resolve
   what is often a severe and protracted identity crisis.' (Wolin, 2007:
   26).
68 This is of course the basic thrust of Hardt and Negri's (2000) 'multitude'
   thesis: according to their view of things, capitalism is bringing about
   changes in the very composition of society that have already put in
   motion developments that will ultimately result in the supersession of
   capitalism by a new system.
69 Brink 2000: 306.
70 Cf. Fitrakis, Rosenfeld and Wasserman 2006.

                                      148

                                   NOTES

71 For instance, see Zizek 2001: 109. It must be mentioned, too, that Zizek
   draws very heavily on Peter Sloterdijk's Critique of Cynical Reason.
72 Zizek 2004a: 95.

                     4. RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE

 1 For reasons of space. I will consider only the Australian, American,
   French and German responses to Deleuze and Guattari's work. From
   even this limited survey, however, it is obvious that a more global com-
   parative analysis of the national receptions of their work would be
   rewarding.
 2 Jameson 2006:121-4. That this was true of the reception of Deleuze and
   Guattari in the US can be seen in the fact that his first commentators
   there were all from French or Comparative Literature programmes, e.g.,
   Ronald Bogue, Michael Hardt, Eugene Holland, Fredric Jameson, Alice
   Jardine, Brian Massumi and Charles Stivale.
 3 This in turn promoted the growth of Cultural Studies by setting aside
   the intuitionism that dominated literary studies until then (a hangover
   from the Richards and Leavis era), and by politicizing the unquestioned
   assumptions of Anthropology and History departments schooled in the
   ways of empire, and ultimately by collapsing the boundaries between
   text and context. Although Cultural Studies in Australia today tends to
   be rather reserved about theory, it would never have developed the way
   it has if theory had not blossomed there first.
 4 Descombes 1980: 178.
 5 Descombes 1980: 178.
 6 Eugene Holland (1999:11-13) offers a slightly different, though not con-
   tradictory, account of the significance of Nietzsche to Deleuze and
   Guattari. He positions Nietzsche as a kind of 'vanishing mediator'
   bridging Freud and Marx. I do not think this is necessarily a wrong way
   of looking at things, but in my view it overemphasizes the structural
   importance of Nietzsche. In Holland's account, the basic architecture of
   Anti-Oedipus is taken from Nietzsche, whereas I have suggested
   Nietzsche functions more as a 'tensor' or 'intensifier' of a blueprint
   derived from Marx.
 7 Cf. Alliez 2006 and Badiou 2000. But see also David-Menard 2005:
   115-27.
 8 Badiou 2000. Sadly, while Deleuzians have been quick to reject Zizek's
   reading of Deleuze, they have been much less vocal in their response to
   Badiou, even though it is a much more egregious misreading of Deleuze
   than Zizek (not the least because it is a much more attentive reading).
 9 It is almost impossible to say enough bad things about Zizek's book, but
   as it has already been repudiated at length by several other scholars,
   there is no need for me to rehearse in detail here all the reasons why it is
   a bad book - see, for example, Berressem (2005), Lambert (2006:
   81-101) and Smith (2004). It is, however, worth adding a brief comment
   about Zizek's reply to criticism of this book because it is bizarre even by

                                     149

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

   his standards. In separate replies to Smith (Zizek 2004b) and myself
   (Zizek 2005), he claims that critics have ignored the fact that his book is
   making a serious proposition, namely that Deleuze and Guattari's
   concept of the unconscious is in fact Jungian in conception. What is
   bizarre about this response is that one would look in vain in Organs
   without Bodies to find this claim actually being made. It seems that in
   addition to the charge of not reading Deleuze and Guattari very well we
   have to add the charge that Zizek doesn't read Zizek very well. His evi-
   dence for this supposed Jungian connection is flimsy indeed: apparently
   Jung used the word 'rhizome' in a memoir written in 1961. Does this
   make Deleuze and Guattari Jungian? Hardly. Similarly, the fact that
   Deleuze used Jung in his critique of Freud in his book on Masoch no
   more makes him Jungian than the fact that Zizek sometimes uses
   Deleuze in a positive fashion makes him Deleuzian. The more serious
   claim is that Deleuze and Guattari's concept of the unconscious is ulti-
   mately 'primitive', meaning pre-social. This claim is patently false and
   can be repudiated very simply by remembering that Deleuze and
   Guattari's most fundamental point in Anti-Oedipus is that unconscious
   desire is part of the very infrastructure of society and vice versa.
10 For a more detailed explanation of why the German reception of
   Deleuze and Guattari's work was so unenthusiastic to begin with, see
   Balke (1996). Balke does not lay blame at Frank's door as I have, but his
   description of the reasons why German scholars were initially so cool
   towards Deleuze and Guattari is essentially a portrait of Frank's take on
   their work.
11 The one major exception to this rule is Klaus Theweleit, whose magnifi-
   cent two-volume history of the Brownshirts, Mannerphantasien (1977),
   translated as Male Fantasies (1987), makes extensive use of Anti-
   Oedipus. If it is not, finally, a Deleuzian book, that is because it trans-
   lates Deleuze and Guattari's concept of the machine back into fantasy,
   making it once again the content of dreams rather than the source.
12 Frank 1989: 317.
13 Frank 1989: 318.
14 Frank 1989: 329; 333.
15 Frank 1989: 319.
16 Frank 1989: 341.
17 Cf. Irigaray 1985: 106-18; Jardine 1985: 208-23. But see Colebrook
   2000.
18 Cf. Callinicos 1982: 85-111; 1989: 83-91. See also Dews 1987: 131-43.
19 From this perspective, defending Deleuze and Guattari's Niezschean
   inspiration, as Paul Patton (1988) does, is of ambiguous value: it con-
   cedes too much ground to the opposition because it allows them to set
   the terms of the debate. On this issue, I prefer Deleuze and Guattari's
   own template, and reject both the problem and the solution and come at
   it from a different angle altogether, namely the perspective of Utopia.
20 Thus Lotringer's (2001:155) abusive idea that Deleuze and Guattari left
   behind no model to be followed, nor a theory to be applied, and actively
   discouraged anyone from learning from their thought, has simply to be

                                     150

                              NOTES

rejected as nonsense. They very clearly wanted to change society, that
they left behind no blueprint or programme of change is beside the
point. What they realized is that change could only come about if we -
meaning society as a whole - could be made to give up our addiction to
the present regime. Such a project is properly called 'Utopian'. That
Lotringer thinks Deleuze and Guattari hated such a notion shows how
very poorly he has read them - one has only to see how approvingly they
cite Fourier in Anti-Oedipus, to give only one example, to see how
important Utopia is to their work.

                                151

                     FURTHER READING

Deleuze and Guattari were eclectic in their approach to writing
Anti-Oedipus, a fact that is evident on virtually every page. They
bring to bear an incredible range of source material from literally
all disciplines, from anthropology and comparative religion to philosophy, psychoanalysis and the hard sciences. This can be quite
bewildering. The constant question raised by new readers of
Deleuze and Guattari's work is whether or not there is anything to
be gained by either reading some of Deleuze's previous books (AntiOedipus was Guattari's first published book), or their original
sources. My answer to both these questions is a cautious 'yes', but
with two qualifications: first, Deleuze's previous books should be
read with an eye toward the real continuity in his work from his first
to his last books, thereby avoiding the casuistry of the 'two
Deleuzes' thesis; second, one has to recognize that Deleuze and
Guattari were 'selective' readers to use Michael Hardt's important
methodological stipulation (Hardt 1993: xix). They use other
thinkers to advance their own project and at no time do they try to
give a systematic account of any of the works they draw on - not
Freud, not Marx, not Lacan, not anyone. As such it is futile to ask
whether they are really Nietzschean or Lacanian, or indeed whether
they got their Nietzsche or Lacan right. This isn't to let them off the
hook by any means, but it is to say that they should be read in terms
of the cogency of their creation. The sole question of relevance is
whether or not schizoanalysis works. In order to be able to make
that judgement it is, to be sure, helpful to have an idea of where they
are coming from. The following suggestions for further reading are
offered then as a preliminary guide for how to get started reading
Deleuze and Guattari.

                                  152

                            FURTHER READING

                            Works by Deleuze

I am not convinced that extensive pre-reading of Deleuze's previous
books is all that helpful in understanding Anti-Oedipus. In some
respects, it could even be said that it is redundant inasmuch that, as I've
argued here, Anti-Oedipus picks up on ideas Deleuze developed in
earlier work and expands on them, giving them a more practical edge.
For exactly the same reason, though, it could be said that interrogating
his previous work is vital. That said, I would recommend the following
selections from Deleuze's work: chapter 2 of Difference and Repetition,
which details Deleuze's theory of passive synthesis; chapter 13 of The
Logic of Sense, which is an account of Artaud's notion of the body
without organs; chapter 5 of Empiricism and Subjectivity, which gives
an account of the notion that relations are external to their terms; and
lastly chapter 3 of Nietzsche and Philosophy on critique.
   As would be obvious from this book, Deleuze and Guattari's
interviews, given and published in the years after Anti-Oedipus
appeared, are also extremely helpful. So one should certainly also
look at Dialogues and Negotiations.

                            Works by Guattari

Guattari's recently published diary and working notes, The AntiOedipus Papers, is an invaluable resource for anyone interested in
understanding Anti-Oedipus. Particularly useful, in my opinion, is
the diary, because here one sees Guattari applying his ideas and concepts to himself. It offers an extremely interesting example of schizoanalysis as a form of self-analysis.

                         Works by other authors

I have broken this list into three broad categories of sources: (1) psychoanalysis; (2) historical materialism; and (3) literature. The lists
are in descending order of importance. I have only included those
works which are readily available in English.

Psychoanalysis
Freud: Deleuze and Guattari refer explicitly and extensively to several
works by Freud, making it practically impossible for any reader ignorant of these texts to make sense of their arguments. In particular,

                                    153

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

one must at least read the essay on Schreber, 'Psychoanalytic Notes
on an Autobiographical Account of a Case of Paranoia' (in volume
12 of the Standard Edition [SE] of Freud's work). One might also
read in conjunction with this Schreber's Memoirs of My Nervous
Illness. Also useful are the following essays by Freud: A Child is
Being Beaten' (SE, vol 17), Analysis Terminable and Interminable'
(SE, vol 23), The Unconscious' (SE, vol 14), and The Ego and the
Id' (SE, vol 19). This list could be expanded quite easily, but this is
sufficient as a starting point.

Lacan: Deleuze and Guattari (particularly Guattari who was a fully
trained member of Lacan's school), were clearly familiar with most
if not all Lacan's work. Achieving this sort of familiarity is a life's
work in itself. My recommendation is that one should read at least a
couple of Lacan's essays as well as one good introduction to his work
such as Elizabeth Grosz's Jacques Lacan: A Feminist Introduction or
Slavoj Zizek's Looking Awry. The key Lacan essays one needs to read
are as follows: 'Seminar on "The Purloined Letter"', and 'Position
of the Unconscious' (both in Ecrits: The First Complete Edition in
English), and The Neurotic Individual's Myth' (Psychoanalytic
Quarterly 48, pp. 405-25).

Bettelheim: Deleuze and Guattari draw directly on Bettelheim's
case analysis of 'Joey' in his The Empty Fortress in their account of
desiring-machines. This text is additionally interesting for the fact
that Bettelheim supplies pictures of Joey's machines.

Klein: Deleuze and Guattari range widely over Klein's works, but
focus particularly on her case analysis of the ten-year-old boy
Richard (aka 'Little Richard' or 'Dick') in their account of desiringmachines. Published as a book-length work, Narrative of a Child
Analysis, this work is certainly worth dipping into, particularly the
first few chapters which detail the establishment phase of the analysis. As with the Bettelheim book, it is the illustrations, in this case
drawings by Richard himself, that prove the most illuminating. They
show very clearly the extent to which it was the 'war' rather than his
parents that caused his mental disturbance.

Reich: The importance of Reich to Deleuze and Guattari is obvious
inasmuch that they frequently commend him for raising questions

                                  154

                           FURTHER READING

neglected by other psychoanalysts, but ultimately at the level of
actual methodology they draw very little from his work. But having
said that, it is certainly instructive to browse both The Function of
the Orgasm and The Mass Psychology of Fascism. Reich's work is an
early example of an attempt, albeit flawed, to apply psychoanalysis
to contemporary political problems.

Historical materialism
Marx: Deleuze and Guattari are clearly committed to a Marxist
view of the world, but their approach to Marx's work is by no means
doctrinal. Marx isn't a writer that one can easily segment into key
essays, so it is difficult to identify a useful specimen of his work that
could serve as an introduction. But readers may find it useful to
begin by reading the introduction to Grundrisse and the section on
the general formula for capital in Capital: Volume 1. Also useful is
the discussion of the tendency towards a falling rate of profit in
Capital: Volume 3.

Nietzsche: Deleuze and Guattari profit a great deal from Nietzsche's
The Genealogy of Morals, particularly the second essay on guilt, bad
conscience and debt. This highly stimulating essay is relatively easy
read by Nietzsche's standards and well worth the effort.

Foucault: At the end of chapter one, Deleuze and Guattari explicitly
situate their work as a continuation of Foucault's critique of psychoanalysis in Madness and Civilisation. In particular one should
read the chapter entitled The Birth of the Asylum'.

Sartre: Both Deleuze and Guattari have expressed a debt to Sartre.
In Anti-Oedipus this debt is quite explicit - their discussion of
molar and molecular owes a great deal to Sartre's analysis of groups
in Critique of Dialectical Reason: Volume 1 (see book 2, sections 1
and 2).

Fanon: The Wretched of the Earth is a key work for Deleuze and
Guattari because in spite of its Freudian inspiration it demonstrates
very clearly that delirium is racial and political before it is familial.

Turner: Deleuze and Guattari suggest that Victor Turner's famous
essay on the practice of a Ndembu Doctor (chapter 10 of The Forest

                                   155

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

of Symbols) is a perfect example of schizoanalysis. For this reason
alone it should be regarded as essential reading.

Literature
Artaud: It is well known that Deleuze and Guattari adopt Artaud's
term 'body without organs' as their own. But what is less clear is how
much their concept owes to Artaud. My feeling is that the connection
between Artaud and Deleuze and Guattari should be treated carefully, as a source of inspiration perhaps rather than the original source
of particular concepts. The following pieces, sampled in Antonin
Artaud: Selected Writings, edited by Susan Sontag, are good for
openers: The Nerve Meter', 'Voyage to the Land of Tarahumara',
'Van Gogh, the Man Suicided by Society', and perhaps most importantly of all, 'To Have Done with the Judgement of God'.

Lawrence: It would be difficult to overstate the importance of D.H.
Lawrence's work, especially his later essays, to Deleuze and Guattari.
In this regard, it is well worth reading the twin volumes Psychoanalysis
and the Unconscious and Fantasia of the Unconscious. It should be
borne in mind, however, that these are mythopoeic not philosophic
works, so they need to be read with caution. While Deleuze and
Guattari are sympathetic to their polemic spirit, they don't embrace
their conceptual constructions.

Proust: It would be impossible to overstate the importance of Proust
to Deleuze. Proust is a constant presence in all his work. And though
it is a big ask to plough through all 3,000 pages of Remembrance of
Things Past, it is certainly worth the effort to read at least the first
volume Swanris Way.

Beckett: Although a difficult author, Beckett's great trilogy Molloy,
Malone Dies and The Unnameable, is a crucial point of reference for
Deleuze and Guattari's understanding of schizophrenia as a creative
process and not just a destructive illness.

Buchner: Deleuze and Guattari make extensive use of Buchner's
short piece Lenz (which is included in Penguin's edition of Buchner's
Complete Plays, Lenz and Other Writings) in the discussion of
desiring-machines. It is a beautiful piece of writing which imaginatively reconstructs a schizophrenic delirium.

                                   156

                          FURTHER READING

Nerval: Nerval's 'Sylvie' (readily available in the Penguin edition of
NervaPs Selected Writings) is a short and beautiful piece that, like
Lenz, informs Deleuze and Guattari's discussion of the schizophrenic process.

Butler: Deleuze and Guattari identify Samuel Butler's 'Book of
Machines' (chapter 23 of Erewhon) as the inspiration for their
'machinic vitalism'. It illuminates very usefully Deleuze and
Guattari's twin notions of the non-totalized whole and part of no
part.

                                 157

                         BIBLIOGRAPHY

                     BY DELEUZE AND GUATTARI
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2004a) [new edition] Anti-Oedipus, trans
  R. Hurley, M. Seem and H. R. Lane, London and New York: Continuum.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2002) [nouvelle edition augmentee] L'Anti-
  Oedipe: Capitalisme et Schizophrenic, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2004b) [new edition] A Thousand Plateaus,
  trans Brian Massumi, London and New York: Continuum.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (2001) Milk Plateaux: Capitalisme et
  Schizophrenic 2, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1994) What is Philosophy?, trans Hugh
  Tomlinson and Graham Burchell, New York: Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1991) Quest-ce que la philosophic?, Paris:
  Editions de Minuit.

                              BY DELEUZE
Deleuze, G. (2006) Two Regimes of Madness: Texts and Interviews 1975-1995,
  edited by D. Lapoujade and trans A. Hodges and M. Taormina, New York:
  Semiotext(e).
Deleuze, G. (2003) Deux Regimes de Fous: Textes et Entretiens 1975-1995,
  Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Deleuze, G. (2005a) Cinema 1: The Movement-Image, trans Hugh
  Tomlinson and Robert Galeta, London: Continuum.
Deleuze, G. (1983) Cinema 1: L'image-mouvement, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Deleuze, G. (2005b) Cinema 2: The Time-Image, trans Hugh Tomlinson and
  Robert Galeta, London: Continuum.
Deleuze, G. (1985) Cinema 2: L'image-temps, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Deleuze, G. (2004) Desert Islands and Other Texts 1953-1974, edited by
  David Lapoujade and trans M. Taormina, New York: Semiotext(e).
Deleuze, G. (2002) L'ile Deserte et Autres Textes: Textes et Entretiens
  1953-1974, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Deleuze, G. and Parnet, C. (2002) Dialogues II, trans H. Tomlinson and
  B. Habberjam, London: Continuum.

                                   158

                               BIBLIOGRAPHY

Deleuze, G. and Parnet, C. (1996) Dialogues, Paris: Flammarion.
Deleuze, G. (2000) Proust and Signs: The Complete Text, trans R. Howard,
  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, G. (1997) Essays Critical and Clinical, trans Daniel W. Smith and
  Michael A. Greco, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, G. (1995) Negotiations, trans Martin Joughin, New York:
  Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G. (2003) Pourparlers 1972-1990, Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Deleuze, G. (1994) Difference and Repetition, trans P. Patton, London:
  Athlone.
Deleuze, G. (2005) Difference et repetition, Paris: Presses Universitaires de
  France.
Deleuze, G. (1991) Empiricism and Subjectivity: An Essay on Hume's Theory
  of Human Nature, trans Constantin Boundas, New York: Columbia
  University Press.
Deleuze, G. (1998) [sixth edition] Empirisme et Subjectivite: Essai sur la
  Nature Humaine selon Hume, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Deleuze, G. (1988) Bergsonism, trans H. Tomlinson and B. Habberjam, New
  York: Zone Books.
Deleuze, G. (1983) Nietzsche and Philosophy, trans Hugh Tomlinson,
  London: Athlone.
Deleuze, G. (2003) [fourth edition] Nietzsche et la philosophic, Paris: Presses
  Universitaires de France.

                               BY GUATTARI
Guattari, F. (2006) The Anti-Oedipus Papers, edited by S. Nadaud, trans
 K. Gotman, New York: Semiotext(e).
Guattari, F. (2004) Ecritspour L'Anti-Oedipe, edited by Stephane Nadaud,
 Paris: Lignes-Manifeste.
Guattari, F. (1995a) Chaosmosis: An Ethico-Aesthetic Paradigm, trans
 P. Bains and J. Pefanis, Sydney: Power Publications.
Guattari, F. (1995b) Chaosophy, edited by S. Lotringer, New York:
  Semiotext(e).

                    ABOUT DELEUZE AND GUATTARI
Agamben, G. (1999) Potentialities: Collected Essays in Philosophy, edited by
  and trans D. Heller-Roazen, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Alliez, E. (2006) "Anti-Oedipus - Thirty Years On (Between Art and
  Politics)', in M. Fuglsang and B.M. S0rensen, Deleuze and The Social,
  Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 135-68.
Ansell-Pearson, K. (1999) Germinal Life: The Difference and Repetition of
  Deleuze, London: Routledge.
Badiou, A. (2000) Deleuze: The Clamour of Being, trans L. Burchill,
  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Balke, F. (1996) 'Sur la non-reception de Gilles Deleuze en Allemagne',
  trans J. Lacoste, La Quinzaine Litteraire, December-February, pp. 23-4.

                                     159

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4A/T/-OED/PUS

Berressem, H. (2005) 'Is it Possible Not to Love Zizek? On Slavoj Zizek's
  Missed Encounter with Deleuze', Electronic Book Review.
Bogue, R. (1989) Deleuze and Guattari, London: Routledge.
Bonta, M. and Protevi, J. (2004) Deleuze and Geophilosophy: A Guide and
  Glossary, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Buchanan, I. (2006a) 'Deleuze's "Life" Sentences', Polygraph 18,
  pp. 129-47.
Buchanan, I. (2006b) 'Is a Schizoanalysis of Cinema Possible?', Revue
  CiNeMAS, 16:2-3, pp. 117-45.
Buchanan, I. (2006c) 'Treatise on Militarism', in Buchanan and Parr (eds),
  Deleuze and the Contemporary World, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
  Press, pp. 21^1.
Buchanan, I. (2006d) 'Practical Deleuzism and Postmodern Space', in
  Fuglsang and S0rensen (eds), Deleuze and The Social, Edinburgh:
  Edinburgh University Press, pp. 135-50.
Buchanan, I. and Parr, A. (2006) 'Introduction', in Buchanan and Parr
  (eds), Deleuze and the Contemporary World, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
  University Press, pp. 1-20.
Buchanan, I. (2000) Deleuzism: A Metacommentary, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
  University Press.
Colebrook, C. (2000) 'Is Sexual Difference a Problem?', in I. Buchanan and
  C. Colebrook (eds), Deleuze and Feminist Theory, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
  University Press, 110-27.
David-Menard, M. (2005) Deleuze et la psychanalyse, Paris: Presses
  Universitaires de France.
Descombes, V. (1980) Modern French Philosophy, trans L. Scott-Fox and
  J. M. Harding, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Faulkner, K. (2006) Deleuze and the Three Syntheses of Time, New York:
  Peter Lang.
Foss, P. and Morris, M. (1978) Language, Sexuality and Subversion, Sydney:
  Feral Publications.
Foucault, M. (1977) 'Intellectuals and Power', in D.F. Bouchard (ed),
  Language, Counter-Memory and Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews
  by Michel Foucault, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, pp. 205-17.
Foucault, M. (1975) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans
  A. Sheridan, London: Penguin.
Frank, M. (1989) What is Neostructuralism?, trans S. Wilke and R. Gray,
  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Genosko, G. (2007) 'The Figure of the Arab in Three Billion Perverts',
  Deleuze Studies, 1:1, pp. 60-78.
Genosko, G. (2002) Felix Guattari: An Aberrant Introduction, London:
  Continuum.
Hallward, P. (2006) Out of this World: Deleuze and the Philosophy of
  Creation, London: Verso.
Hardt, M. (1993) Gilles Deleuze: An Apprenticeship in Philosophy,
  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Holland, E. (1999) Deleuze and Guattari s Anti-Oedipus: Introduction to
  Schizoanalysis, London: Routledge.

                                   160

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

Jameson, F. (1999) 'Marxism and Dualism in Deleuze', in I. Buchanan (ed),
   A Deleuzian Century?, Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, pp. 13-36.
Kerslake, C. (2007) Deleuze and the Unconscious, London: Continuum.
Lambert, G. (2006) Who's Afraid of Deleuze and Guattari?, London:
   Continuum.
Lotringer, S. (2001) 'Doing Theory', in S. Lotringer and S. Cohen (eds),
   French Theory in America, New York: Routledge, pp. 125-62.
Massumi, B. (1992) A User's Guide to Capitalism and Schizophrenia:
   Deviations from Deleuze and Guattari, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
May, T. (2005) Gilles Deleuze: An Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Nadaud, S. (2006) 'Love Story between an Orchid and a Wasp', in Guattari,
   F. (2006), The Anti-Oedipus Papers, edited by S. Nadaud, trans K.
   Gotman, New York: Semiotext(e), pp. 11-22.
Parr, A. (ed) (2005) The Deleuze Dictionary, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
   University Press.
Patton, P. (1988) 'Marxism and Beyond: Strategies of Reterritoralisation',
   in C. Nelson and L. Grossberg (eds), Marxism and the Interpretation of
   Culture, London: Macmillan, pp. 123-39.
Smith, D. (2004) The Inverse Side of the Structure: Zizek on Deleuze and
   Lacan', Criticism, 46: 4, pp. 635-50.
Stivale, C. (ed) (2005) Gilles Deleuze: Key Concepts, Chesham: Acumen
   Publishing.
Thoburn, N. (2003) Deleuze, Marx and Politics, London: Routledge.
Williams, J. (2003) Gilles Deleuze's Difference and Repetition: A Critical
   Introduction and Guide, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Zizek, S. (2005) 'Concesso non Dato', in G. Boucher et al (eds), Traversing
   the Fantasy: Critical Responses to Slavoj Zizek, London: Ashgate,
 v pp. 219-55.
Zizek, S. (2004a) Organs without Bodies: On Deleuze and Consequences,
   London: Routledge.
Zizek, S. (2004b) 'Notes on a Debate "From within the People"', Criticism,
   46:4, pp. 661-6.

                            OTHER AUTHORS
Althusser, L. (1971) Lenin and Philosophy, trans B. Brewster, NY: Monthly
  Review Press.
Anderson, P. (1983) In the Tracks of Historical Materialism, London: Verso.
Arrighi, G. (1994) The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power, and the
  Origins of Our Times, London: Verso.
Badiou, A. (2005) Metapolitics, trans J. Barker, London: Verso.
Badiou, A. (2001) Ethics: An Essay on the Understanding of Evil, trans
  P. Hallward, London: Verso.
Baudrillard, J. (1987) Forget Foucault, trans N. Dufresne, New York:
  Semiotext(e).
Benjamin, W. (1979) One-Way Street, trans E. Jephcott and K. Shorter,
  London: Verso.

                                    161

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

Bettelheim, B. (1967) The Empty Fortress: Infantile Autism and the Birth of
   the Self, New York: Free Press.
Brink, A. (2000) The Rights of Desire, London: Vintage.
Buchanan, I. (2006d) Fredric Jameson: Live Theory, London: Continuum.
Biichner, G. (1993) [c. 1835] Lenz in Biichner: Complete Plays, Lenz and
   Other Writings, trans J. Reddick, London: Penguin, pp. 141-64.
Callinicos, A. (1989) Against Postmodernism: A Marxist Critique,
  Cambridge: Polity.
Callinicos, A. (1982) Is there a Future for Marxism?, London: Macmillan.
Certeau, M. de (1997) The Capture of Speech and Other Political Writings,
  trans T. Conley, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Certeau, M. de (1984) The Practice of Everyday Life, trans S. Kendall,
  Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cockburn, P. (2006) The Occupation: War and Resistance in Iraq, London:
  Verso.
Conrad, J. (2000) [1900] Lord Jim, London: Penguin.
Davis, M. (2006) Planet of Slums, London: Verso.
De Landa, M. (2006) A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and
  Social Complexity, London: Continuum.
Dews, P. (1987) Logics of Disintegration: Post-structuralist Thought and the
   Claims of Critical Theory, London: Verso.
Dine, P. (1994) Images of the Algerian War: French Fiction and Film,
  1954-1992, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Fields, B. (1984) 'French Maoism', in S. Sayres et al (eds), The 60s
  without Apology, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 148-77.
Fitrakis, R.J., Rosenfeld, S. and Wasserman, H. (2006) What Happened in
   Ohio? A Documentary Record of Theft and Fraud in the 2004 Election,
  New York: New Press.
Frank, T. (2004) What's the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won
   the Heart of America, New York: Metropolitan Books.
Frank, T. (1997) The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture, Counterculture,
  and the Rise of Hip Consumerism, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Freud, S. (1991) [1923] The Ego and the Id', in A. Richards (ed), On
   Metapsychology: Penguin Freud Library Volume 11, trans J. Strachey,
   London: Penguin, pp. 350-401.
Freud, S. (1990) Case Histories II: Penguin Freud Library Volume 9, trans
   J. Strachey, London: Penguin.
Freud, S. (1979) [1911] 'Psychoanalytic Notes on an Autobiographical
  Account of a Case of Paranoia (Dementia Paranoides)', in A. Richards
   (ed), Case Histories II: Penguin Freud Library Volume 9, trans J. Strachey,
   London: Penguin, pp. 141-223.
Freud, S. (1976) [1900] The Interpretation of Dreams: Penguin Freud Library
   Volume 4, London: Penguin.
George, S. (2004) Another World is Possible If. . ., London: Verso.
Hardt, M. and Negri, A. (2000) Empire, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
   University Press.
Holloway, J. (2005) [new edition] Change the World Without Taking Power,
   London: Pluto Press.

                                     162

                               BIBLIOGRAPHY

Irigaray, L. (1985) This Sex which is not One, trans C. Porter, Ithaca: Cornell
   University Press.
Jameson, F. (2006) 'Live Jameson', in I. Buchanan, Frederick Jameson: Live
   Theory, London: Continuum, pp. 120-32.
Jameson, F. (2005) Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia
   and Other Science Fictions, London: Verso.
Jameson, F. (1994) The Seeds of Time, New York: Columbia.
Jameson, F. (1991) Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late
   Capitalism, London: Verso.
Jameson, F. (1990) Late Marxism: Adorno, or, The Persistence of the
   Dialectic, London: Verso.
Jameson, F. (1988a) The Ideologies of Theory: Essays 1971-1986. Volume 1:
   Situations of Theory, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Jameson, F. (1988b) The Ideologies of Theory: Essays 1971-1986. Volume2:
   Syntax of History, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Jameson, F. (1972) The Prison-House of Language: A Critical Account of
   Structuralism and Russian Formalism, Princeton: Princeton University
   Press.
Jameson, F. (1971) Marxism and Form: Twentieth-Century Dialectical
   Theories of Literature, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Jardine, A. (1985) Gynesis: Configurations of Woman and Modernity, Ithaca:
   Cornell University Press.
Klein, N. (2007) 'Sacrificial Wolfie', The Nation, 14 May, p. 10.
Klein, N. (2001) 'Reclaiming the Commons', New Left Review, 9, pp. 81-9.
Klein, N. (2000) No Logo, London: Flamingo.
Lacan, J. (2006) Ecrits: The First Complete Edition in English, trans B. Fink,
   New York and London: W.W. Norton.
Laclau, E. and Mouffe, C. (1985) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards
   a Radical Democratic Politics, London: Verso.
Laing, R.D. (1990) [1959] The Divided Self: An Existential Study in Sanity
   and Madness, London: Penguin.
Marx, K. (1976) [1867] Capital: A Critique of Political Economy Volume 1,
   trans B. Fowkes, London: Penguin.
Marx, K. (1973) [c. 1857-8] Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of
   Political Economy, trans M. Nicolaus, London: Penguin.
Negri, A. (2004) Negri on Negri: Antonio Negri in Conversation with Anne
   Dufourmantelle, trans M.B. DeBevoise, London: Routledge.
Oury, J. (2007) The Hospital is 111: An Interview with Jean Oury', trans
   D. Reggio, Radical Philosophy, 143, pp. 32^5.
Parenti, M. (1995) Against Empire, San Francisco: City Lights Books.
Proust, M. (2000) Swann's Way, trans C.K. Moncrief, London: Penguin
   Classics.
Ranciere, J. (1999) Disagreement: Politics and Philosophy, trans J. Rose,
   Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Retort (2005) Afflicted Powers: Capital and Spectacle in a New Age of War,
   London: Verso.
Ross, K. (2002) May '68 and its Afterlives, Chicago: Chicago University
   Press.

                                      163

                  DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4/V7Y-OED/PUS

Sartre, J.-P. (2004) Critique of Dialectical Reason: Volume One, trans
  A. Sheridan-Smith, London: Verso.
Schreber, D. (2000) Memoirs of my Nervous Illness, trans I. Macalpine and
  R. Hunter, New York: New York Review of Books.
Sloterdijk, P. (1987) Critique of Cynical Reason, trans M. Eldred,
  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Theweleit, K. (1987) Male Fantasies (2 volumes), trans S. Conway with
  E. Carter and C. Turner, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Tournier, M. (1988) The Wind Spirit: An Autobiography, trans A.
  Goldhammer, Boston: Beacon Press.
Wolin, R. (2007) 'Veiled Intolerance', The Nation, 9 April, pp. 25-30.
Zizek, S. (2006) The Parallax View, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Zizek, S. (2002) [second edition] For They Know not what they do: Enjoyment
  as a Political Factor, London: Verso.
Zizek, S. (2001) [second edition] Enjoy Your Symptom! Jacques Lacan in
  Hollywood and Out, London: Routledge.
Zizek, S. (1993) Tarrying with the Negative: Kant, Hegel, and the Critique of
^ Ideology, Durham: Duke University Press.
Zizek, S. (1991) Looking Awry: An Introduction to Jacques Lacan Through
  Popular Culture, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Zizek, S. (1989) The Sublime Object of Ideology, London: Verso.

                                     164

                                 INDEX

L'Abecedaire de Gilles Deleuze 3,       Callinicos, Alex 138
      139                               cap and trade 111
Adorno, Theodor 2                       capitalist machine 107-16
affiliation and alliance 99-102,        carbon trading 111
      108                               Castration 67, 76
Algeria 5, 15                           chaos 52
Alliez, Eric 135                        childhood 69
Althusser, Louis, 1, 20, 61-2, 83,      Clark, Larry 44
      114                               Cockburn, Patrick 23
Anderson, Perry 1-2, 40, 133,           coding 94, 96-9, \\2see also
      137                                    decoding
anti-production 44, 112-13              Conrad, Joseph 82-8
Aron, Raymond 9                         cool-hunting 26
Arrighi, Giovanni 54                    crowds 91
Artaud, Antonin 60                      cultural revolution 65
axiomatic 112, 148n65                   cultural studies 19
                                        culture-jamming 25-6
Badiou, Alain 2, 67, 135-6, 146n38      cynical reason 27, 125-7
Bateson, Gregory 33, 68, 79
Baudrillard, Jean 21                        Davis, Mike 62
becoming-woman 34                           Dawsoris Creek 81
belief 113, 118                             debt 100
Bertolucci, Bernardo 13-14                  decoding 105, 112 see also coding
biochemistry of schizophrenia 35            DeLanda, Manuel 92
body 24^5, 101                              Deleuze, Gilles
body without organs 44, 60, 63, 81,           and the history of philosophy
      83                                         4-5
La Borde Clinic 6, 38                         rivalry with Jacques Lacan 6-7
Brink, Andre 119-20                         delirium 40, 45, 73
Biichner, Georg 33, 43 see also             depolitization 114
      Lenz                                  Derrida, Jacques 106
Buffy: The Vampire Slayer 81                Descombes, Vincent 134-5
Burroughs, William 106                      desire 11, 24, 39, 47, 81,92, 123

                                      165

                   DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S 4/VT/-OED/PUS

desiring-machines 38-50, 90, 96,         id 27-8
      120                                ideology 61, 72, 126
desiring-production 27, 28, 29, 31,      incest 70, 96, 97-8
      37,43-5,49,71,92,97-8,             Independence Day 78
      119                                interpellation 61,64, 78
despotic machine 102-7                   Italy 18
Destricted 44                            Iraq War 23-4, 84, 125
Deterritorialization and
      reterritorialization 107, 116,     Jameson, Fredric, 2, 12, 75, 78,
      119-20                                  82-8, 103, 138
dialectical reversal 78, 83, 85          Jaws 75-8
Difference and Repetition 51-2
double-bind 33, 68, 79                   Kant, Immanuel 48-9, 52
                                         Klein, Naomi 25-6, 147n60
earth 95                                 Klossowski, Pierre 42-3
ego 28
environmentalism 111, 129                labour 58
eroticism 44                             Lacan, Jacques 6-7, 39, 50, 58, 61,
                                               75, 89, 95, 106
falling rate of profit 110               Laing, RD 41
false consciousness 127-8                Leclaire, Serge 121-2
Fanon, Frantz 15                         Leninism 10
feeling 80                               Lenz 41-3, 73 see also Buchner
Fields, Belden 15                        literature 34
flow 96, 105                             little witnesses 53
forced choice 129, 145n25                Lord Jim ^1-%
Foucault, Michel 21, 22, 23              love 81
Frank, Manfred 133, 136-8
Frank, Thomas 26-7, 125-32               machines 28
Freud, Sigmund 27, 32, 36, 46            Maoism 8, 10, 16,65, 141n27
fused group 77                           Marx 58, 59, 78, 92, 103, 107,
                                              110
general formula of capital 54,           Marxism 48
      107                                materialist psychiatry 39 see also
gift 101                                      schizoanalysis
globalization 17                         May 1968 1-19, 39
Godard, Jean-Luc 16                      MCM' 54-6, 107
Groddeck, Georg 27                       melodrama 80-1
Groupe d'Information sur les             microphysics of power 22, 89
      Prisons 5, 23                      micropolitics of desire 72^
Group fantasy 86-7                       military-Keynesianism 113
Guattari, Felix, 38                      molar and molecular 88-9
   and La Borde clinic 5                 Moonlighting 81
   and radical politics 5                multiplicity 23
                                         multitude 148n68
habit 52-3
Hallward, Peter 51, 141n29                   Negri, Antonio 3, 5, 6, 140nl6
Hardt, Michael 44-5                          neo-tribalism 102

                                       166

                                   INDEX

Nietzsche, Friedrich 28, 42, 82, 83,     Sarkozy, Nicholas 2
     84^5,94,102, 138                    Sartre, Jean-Paul 4, 77, 140nl4
nonhuman sex 121                         schizoanalysis 10, 29, 31, 116-32
                                              see also materialist
Oedipus 32, 76, 79                            psychiatry
  crisis 69                              schizophrenia 33, 40, 114
  family as stimulus 72                     and biochemistry 35
  fictitious desire 68, 69-70            schizophrenic process 41, 45
  getting rid of 117-21                  Schreber, Daniel Paul 33, 34-6
overcoding 112                           Schweninger, Ernst 27
Oury, Jean 6                             self 53
                                         sexual desire 29, 44
Parenti, Michael 110                     sexual difference 124
partial objects 122                      Sloterdijk, Peter 27
passive synthesis 50-64, 72, 74,         Smallville*\
       144n8                             social machines 90-6, 108
   illegitimate synthesis 72-3,          social production 45
      74-88                              social repression 48, 71
   legitimate synthesis 72-3             society of control 106
perceptual synthesis 53                  Soto, Hernando de 62-3
phallus 67-8, 75, 122                    state 102-116
philosophical illusion 131               symptom formation 64, 117
pick-up method 3                         synthesis of conjunction 63-4, 72,
Pinhas, Richard 4                              85-8 see also passive synthesis
plane of obviousness 62                  synthesis of connection 57-9, 72,
pleasure 46                                    74-8 see also passive synthesis
pornography 44                           synthesis of disjunction 59-63, 72,
power 10, 20-1, 24, 83                         78-85 see also passive
praxis 22-3                                    synthesis
primal repression 30, 96, 122
primitive accumulation 55, 58,               tattoo 102
      94                                     territorial machine 96-102, 105 see
primitive inscription 100-2                        also primitive society
primitive society 94-5 see also              Third World 62-3, 81-2, 109
      territorial machine                    toolbox 22
productive unconscious 50                    Tournier, Michel 4
psychoanalysis 29, 31, 46, 49,
      65-72,116                              Uexkull, Jacob von 53
   internal reversal 66                      unconscious 27-31, 40, 45, 50, 54,
   paralogisms 65-72                             73
psychic repression 48, 71
psychosis 36                                 vanishing mediator 103-4
                                             Vietnam 17
Ranciere, Jacques 114
religion 115                                 Western Marxism 1-2
ressentiment 84-5                            What's the Matter with Kansas
revolution 10-11,22, 87, 116                     125-32
Ross, Kristin 7-19                           Wolf-Man 30

                                       167

                 DELEUZE AND GUATTARI'S ANTI-OEDIPUS

Xena: Warrior Princess 81          Zizek, Slavoj 44, 63, 75, 76, 125-7,
X-Files 81                              136, 143n9, 149n9

                                 168