Cinema 2
The Time-lmage
Gilles Deleuze
Translated, by Hugh Tomlinson
and Robert Galeta

 M
 IN     University of Minnesota Press
 NE
 SO     Minneapolis
 TA

Copyright © 1989 The ÂtRlEme-Pres!
First published as Cinéma 2, L’Image-temps
Copyright © 1985 by Les Editions de Minuit, Paris.
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290, Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
Fifth printing 1997
Library of Congress Number 85-28898
ISBN 0-8166-1676-0 (v. 2)
ISBN 0-8166-1677-9 (pbk.; v. 2)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
The University of Minnesota is an
equal-opportunity educator and employer.

Contents
Preface to the English Edition
Translators’ Introduction
Chapter 1 Beyond the movement-image
1 How is neo-realism defined? —Optical and sound
  situations, in contrast to sensory-motor situations:
  Rossellini, De Sica —Opsigns and sonsigns; objectivism-
  subjectivism, real-imaginary —The new wave: Godard
  and Rivette-Tactisigns (Bresson)
2 Ozu, the inventor of pure optical and sound images -
  Everyday banality —Empty spaces and still lifes —Time
  as unchanging form
3 The intolerable and clairvoyance —From clichés to the
  image —Beyond movement: not merely opsigns and
  sonsigns, but chronosigns, lectosigns, noosigns —The
  example of Antonioni
Chapter 2 Recapitulation of images and
          signs
1 Cinema, semiology and language —Objects and images
2 Pure semiotics: Peirce and the system of images and
  signs —The movement-image, signaletic material and
  non-linguistic features of expression (the internal
  monologue).
3 The time-image and its subordination to the
  movement-image —Montage as indirect representation ]
  of time —Aberrations of movement —The freeing of /
  the time-image: its direct presentation. The relative C/
  difference between the classical and the modern.
Chapter 3 From recollection to dreams:
          third commentary on Bergson
1 The two forms of recognition according to Bergson —
  The circuits of the optical and sound image —
  Rossellini’s characters

vi                                                       Contents
2 From the optical and sound image to the recollection-
  image —Flashbacks and circuits —T he two poles of the
  flashback: Carné, Mankiewicz - Forking time according
  to Mankiewicz —The inadequacy of the recollection-
  image                                                        47
3 Larger and larger circuits —From the optical and sound
  image to the dream-image - The ‘implied dream’:
  movements of world —Spectaculars and musical
  comedy —From Donen and Minnelli to Jerry Lewis —
  The four ages of burlesque —Lewis and Tati                   55
Chapter 4 The crystals of time
1 The actual and the virtual: the smallest circuit —The
  crystal-image —Indiscernible distinctions —The three
  aspects of the crystalline circuit (various examples) - !
  The ambiguous question of the film within the film:
  money and time, industrial art                               68
2 Actual and virtual according to Bergson —Bergsonian
  theses on time: the foundation of time                       78
3 The four states of the crystal and time - Ophüls and
  the perfect crystal —Renoir and the cracked crystal -
  Fellini and the formation of the crystal—The problem
  of film music: sound crystal, gallop and ritornello (Nino
  Rota) —Visconti and the decomposing crystal: the
  elements in Viscond                                          83
Chapter 5 Peaks of present and sheets of
          past: fourth commentary on
          Bergson
1 The two direct time-images: coexistence of sheets of
  past (aspects), simultaneity of peaks of present (accents)
  — The second time-image: Robbe-Grillet, Buñuel —
  Inexplicable differences - Real and imaginary, true
  and false                                                    98
2 The first time-image: the sheets of past according to
  Orson Welles —Questions of depth and field —
  Metaphysics of memory: useless summonable
  recollections (recollection-images), unsummonable
  recollections (hallucinations) —The progression of
  Welles’s films —Memory, time and earth                       105

Contents
3 Sheets of past according to Resnais —Memory, world
  and the ages of the world: the progression of films —
  The laws of transformation of sheets, undecidable
  alternatives —Long shot and short montage —Topology
  and non-chronological time —From feelings to
  thought: hypnosis

Chapter 6 The powers of thefalse
1 The two regimes of the image: from the point of view
  of descriptions (organic and crystalline descriptions) —
  From the point-of view of narrations (truthful and
  falsifying narrations) —Time and the power of the false
  in the image —The character of the forger: his
  multiplicity, his power of metamorphosis
2 Orson Welles and the question of truth —Critique of
  the system of judgem ent: from Lang to Welles - Welles
  and Nietzsche: life, becoming and power of the false —
  The transformation of the centre in Welles —The
  complementarity of short montage and the sequence
  shot —The great series of forgers —Why everything is
  not equivalent to everything else
3 From the point of view of the story (truthful story and
  simulating story) —The model of truth in the real and
  in fiction: E go= E go-T he double transformation of
  the real and ficdon —‘I is another’: simulation, story­
  telling - Perrault, Rouch and the meaning of ‘cinéma-
  vérité’—The before, the after or becoming as the third
  time-image

Chapter 7 Thought and cinema
1 The ambitions of the first cinema: art of the masses and
  new thought, the spiritual automaton —The model of
  Eisenstein —First aspect: from image to thought, the
  cerebral shock —Second aspect: from thought to the
  image, the figures of the internal monologue —The^
  question of metaphor: the most beautiful metaphor of
  the cinema —Third aspect: the equality of image and
  thought, the link between man and world —Thought,
  power and knowledge, the Whole

viii                                                   Contents
2 The crisis of the cinema, the break - Artaud the
  precursor: powerlessness to think —Evolution of the
  spiritual automaton —What the cinema is essentially
  concerned with —Cinema and the Catholic church:
  belief, instead of knowledge - Reasons for believing in
  this world (Dreyer, Rossellini, Godard, Garrel)           164
3 A theorematic structure: from theorem to problem
  (Astruc, Pasolini) —The thought of the Outside: the
  sequence shot —The problem, choice and the
  automaton (Dreyer, Bresson, Rohmer) —The new
  status of the whole —Interstice and irrational break
  (Godard) —The dislocation of the internal monologue
  and the refusal of metaphors —Return from the
  problem to the theorem: Godard’s method and the
  categories                                                173
Chapter 8 Cinema, body and brain,
1 ‘Give me a body, then’—The two poles: everydayness
  and ceremony —First aspect of the experimental
  cinema —The cinema of the body: from attitudes to
  gest (Cassavetes, Godard and Rivette) - After the new
  wave —Garrel and the question of the cinematographic
  creation of bodies —Theatre and cinema —Doillon and
  the question of the space of bodies: non-choice        189
2 Give me a brain —The cinema of the brain and the
  question of death (Kubrick, Resnais) —The two
  fundamental changes from the cerebral point of view —
  The black or white screen, irrational cuts and
  relinkings —Fourth aspect of experimental cinema       204
3 Cinema and politics —The people are missing. . . - The
  trance —Critique of the myth —Story-telling function
  and the production of collective utterances            215
Chapter 9 The components of the image
1 The ‘silent’: the seen and the read —The talkie as
  dimension of the visual image —Speech-act and
  interaction: conversation —The American comedy —
  T he talkie makes visible and the visual image becomes
  readable                                                  225

Contents                                                     ix
2 The sound continuum, its unity —Its differentiation
  according to the two aspects of the out-of-field —The
  voice-off, and the second kind of speech-act: reflexive —
  The Hegelian or the Nietzschean conception of the
  music of the cinema —Music and the presentation of
  time                                                      234
3 The third kind of speech-act, act of story-telling - New
  readability of the visual image: the stratigraphic image
  — Birth of the audio-visual —The respective autonomy
  of the sound image and the visual image —The two
  framings and the irrational break —Straub, Marguerite
  Duras —Relationship between the two autonomous
  images, music’s new sense                                 241
Chapter 10 Conclusions
1 The evolution of automata —Image and information —
  The problem of Syberberg                                262
2 The direct time-image —From opsigns and sonsigns to
  crystalline signs —The different kinds of chronosigns —
  Noosigns —Lectosigns —Disappearance of the
  flashback, the out-of-field and the voice-off           270
3 The usefulness of theory in the cinema                  280
N otes                                                     281
Glossary                                                   335
Index                                                      337


Preface to the English edition

Over several centuries, from the Greeks to Kant, a revolution
took place in philosophy: the subordination of dme to movement
was reversed, time ceases to be the measurement of normal
movement, it increasingly appears for itself and creates paradoxi­
cal movements. Time is out of joint: Hamlet’s words signify that
time is no longer subordinated to movement, but rather move­
ment to time. It could be said that, in its own sphere, cinema has
repeated the same experience, the same reversal, in more
fast-moving circumstances. The movement-image of the socalled classical cinema gave way, in the post-war period, to a direct
time-image. Such a general idea must of course be qualified,
corrected, adapted to concrete examples.
   Why is the Second World War taken as a break? The fact is that,
in Europe, the post-war period has greatly increased the situ­
ations which we no longer know how to react to, in spaces which
we no longer know how to describe. These were ‘any spaces
whatever’, deserted but inhabited, disused warehouses, waste
ground, cides in the course of demolition or reconstruction. And
in these any-spaces-whatever a new race of characters was
stirring, kind of mutant: they saw rather than acted, they were
seers. Hence Rossellini’s great trilogy, Europe 51, Stromboli,
Germany YearO: a child in the destroyed city, a foreign woman on
the island, a bourgeoise woman who starts to ‘see’ what is around
her. Situations could be extremes, or, on the contrary, those of
everyday banality, or both at once: what tends to collapse, or at
least to lose its position, is the sensory-motor schema which
constituted the action-image of the old cinema. And thanks to this
loosening of the sensory-motor linkage, it is time, ‘a littie time in
the pure state’, which rises up to the surface of the screen. Time
ceases to be derived from the movement, it appears in itself and
itself gives rise to false movements. Hence the importance of false
continuity in modern cinema: the images are no longer linked by
rational cuts and continuity, but are relinked by means of false
continuity and irrational cuts. Even the body is no longer exactly
what moves; subject of movement or the instrument of action, it
becomes rather the developer [révélateur] of time, it shows time
 through its tirednesses and waitings (Antonioni).
   It is not quite right to say that the cinematographic image is in

xii                                                          Preface
the present. What is in the present is what the image .‘represents’,
but not the image itself, which, in cinema as in painting, is never to
be confused with what it represents. The image itself is the system
of the relationships between its elements, that is, a set of
relationships of time from which the variable present only flows.
It is in this sense, I think, that Tarkovsky challenges the
distinction between montage and shot when he defines cinema by
the ‘pressure of time’ in the shot. What is specific to the image, as
soon as it is creative, is to make perceptible, to make visible,
relationships of time which cannot be seen in the represented
object and do not allow themselves to be reduced to the present.
Take, for example, a depth of field in Welles, a tracking shot in
Visconti: we are plunged into time rather than crossing space.
Sandra’s car, at the beginning of Visconti’s film, is already moving
in tíme, and Welles’s characters occupy a giant-sized place in time
rather than changing place in space.
   This is to say that the time-image has nothing to do with a
flashback, or even with a recollection. Recollection is only a
former present, whilst the characters who have lost their memo­
ries in modern cinema literally sink back into the past, or emerge
from it, to make visible what is concealed even from recollection.
Flashback is only a signpost and, when it is used by great authors,
it is there only to show much more complex temporal structures
(for example, in Mankiewicz, ‘forking’ time: recapturing the
moment when time could have taken a different course . . .) In
any case, what we call temporal structure, or direct time-image,
clearly goes beyond the purely empirical succession of time -
past-present-future. It is, for example, a coexistence of distinct
durations, or of levels of duration; a single event can belong to
several levels: the sheets of past coexist in a non-chronological
order. We see this in Welles with his powerful intuition of the
earth, then in Resnais with his characters who return from the
land of the dead.
    There are yet more temporal structures: the whole aim of this
book is to release those that the cinematographic image has been
able to grasp and reveal, and which can echo the teachings of
science, what the other arts uncover for us, or what philosophy
makes understandable for us, each in their respective ways. It is,
 foolish to talk about the death of the cinema because cinema is still
 at the beginning of its investigations: making visible these
 relationships of time which can only appear in a creation of the
 image. It is not cinema which needs television —whose image

Preface                                                      xiii
remains so regrettably in the present unless it is enriched by the
art of cinema. The relations and disjunctions between visual and
sound, between what is seen and what is said, revitalize the
problem and endow cinema with new powers for capturing time
in the image (in quite different ways, Pierre Perrault, Straub,
Syberberg . . . ). Yes, if cinema does not die a violent death, it
retains the power of a beginning. Conversely, we must look in
pre-war cinema, and even in silent cinema,for the workings of a
very pure time-image which has always been breaking through,
holding back or encompassing the movement-image: an Ozu still
life as unchanging form of time?
   I would like to thank Robert Galeta and Hugh Tomlinson for
the care which they have put into translating this adventure of
movement and time.
                                                   Gilles Deleuze
                                                      July 1988


Translators' introduction

This is a translation of L’image-temps, the second and final volume
of Deleuze’s work on the cinema, which was first published in
France in 1985. The first volume, L'image-mouvement was trans­
lated in 1986 as Cinema 7.1 Each volume can be read on its own as
dealing with a separate aspect of the cinema, classical and modern,
pre-and post-war, movement and time. Together, they constitute
what has been called ‘one of the finest contemporary reflections on
the liveliness and grandeur of the modern cinema’.'2
   But Deleuze does not set out to provide another theory of the
cinema. His project is a philosophical one. Philosophy itself is not
a reflection on an autonomous object but a practice of creation of
concepts, a constructive pragmadsm. This is a book of philosophi­
cal invention, a theory of cinema as conceptual practice. It is not a
question of ‘applying’ philosophical concepts to the cinema.
Philosophy works with the concepts which the cinema itself gives
rise to.
   For Deleuze, the philosopher ‘works alongside’ the cinema,
producing a classification of its images and signs but reordering
them for new purposes. What makes cinema of special interest is
that, as with painting3, it gives conceptual construction new
dimensions, those of the percept and affect—which should not be
confused with perception and feeling. ‘Affect, percept and
concept are three inseparable powers, going from art to philoso­
phy and the reverse’.4 Cinema and philosophy are brought
together in a continuing process of intercutting. This is philoso­
phy as assemblage, a kind of provoked becoming of thought.
   The book’s first aim is descriptive. Deleuze sets out to describe
the two fundamental images of the cinema — the movementimage and the time-image —and their corresponding signs. The
first volume dealt with the various movement-images of the
classical cinema: perception-image, affect-image and actionimage. The present one deals with the forms of the direct
time-image of the modern cinema.
   The point of transition between the two volumes, and the two
images, is the crisis of the ‘action-image’ after the Second World
War. The unities of situation and action can no longer be
maintained in the disjointed post-war world. This gives rise to
pure optical and sound situations from which the ‘direct time-

xvi                                        Translators’ introduction
image’ emerges. Cinema II is concerned with the taxonomy of the
time-image and its signs, which are called ‘chronosigns’. These are
signs of the order of time, of its internal relations and signs of time
as series. Both types of signs bring the notion of truth into question
and the book culminates in powerful discussions of the powers of
the false in cinema, thought in the cinema and the body and the
brain.
   But this simple summary gives little impression of the extra­
ordinary range and richness of the book. The time-image which
Deleuze releases from modern cinema gives him a new line of
approach to a number of important problems of modern thought:
the undecidability of truth and falsity, the relation of inside and
outside, the nature o f‘the people’, the relation between brain and
body.
   Modern cinema recreates the concepts of modern philosophy,
but in a new way. In particular, the cinematic reversal of the
subordination of time to movement repeats a philosophical
revolution which took place over several centuries. Deleuze draws'
a number of consequences from this reversal in the cinema. His
analysis begins with the break up of the classical notion of the image
which was defined in relation to external world and self-aware
subject. This notion was adequate to the movement-image of
pre-war cinenia but is also a victim of its post-war disintegration.
   The modern world and the modern image operate in the realm
of ‘incommensurability’. The films of Welles, Resnais or Mar­
guerite Duras no longer rely on world or subject. The modern
image cannot be integrated into a totality, it is connected through
‘irrational cuts’ between the non-linked, a confrontation takes
place between ‘outside’ and ‘inside’.
   From this confrontation ‘thought’ appears. Deleuze sees the
modern cinema as exploring a thought outside itself and an
unthought within thought. And it is ‘thought’ which remains his
concern throughout. The construction of concepts is guided by a
secret ‘image of thought’ which
   inspires by its developments, forkings and mutations the
   necessity of always creating new concepts, not as a function of
   external determinism, but as a function of a becoming which
   carries along the problems themselves.3
  The creation of concepts in the cinema is guided by a powerful
‘image of thought’ which is central to our ‘modernity’. As Deleuze

Translators’introduction                                          xvii
says in a recent interview, what interested him about the cinema
was that
  in the screen there can be a brain, as in Resnais or Syberberg’s
  cinema. Cinema does not operate only with linkages by rational
  cuts, but by re-linkages on irrational cuts: this is not the same
  image of thought.6
  This image of thought through re-linkage by ‘irradonal cuts'
inspires Deleuze’s own constructive pluralism. He is engaged in
the creation, the constant re-creation, of a philosophy of imma­
nence, a constructive pragmatism. This book shows such a
philosophy at work in the post-war cinema.
  A whole range of new terminology is introduced in this volume.
In general, these terms gain their sense through the roles they
play in the assemblage of the text and we have not sought to
provide further explanations. The reader is referred to the
glossary of terms in Cinema I. However, the translation of a
number of terms have presented additional difficulties.
  The word ‘auteur’ is a problem for all translators of French
writings about the cinema. Its usual sense is ‘author’, but it was
applied to film makers to indicate a view of the director as author
of the film. The word has sometimes been left untranslated but
this turns an ordinary French word into a technical term. We
have, in general, rendered ‘auteur’ as ‘author’. It should be borne
in mind that, when this word is used of film makers, it carries the
sense of ‘director’ as well as ‘author’.
   Deleuze uses the word ‘bal(l)ade’ to convey both ‘balade’ (trip)
and ‘ballade’ (ballad). We have been unable to retain this dual
sense in English and have rendered this terms as ‘trip/ballad’. In
this volume, as in Cinema I, Deleuze uses the term ‘englobant’ as a
noun. The verb ‘englober’ has the sense of ‘to include, embody,
bring together into a whole’. We have translated this term as
‘encompasser’.
   The word ‘récit’ is commonly translated as ‘story’, ‘account’ or
even ‘narrative’ but is often used in conjunction with ‘histoire’
which is also translated as ‘story’, but also has the sense, ‘history’.
We have rendered ‘récit’ as ‘story’ with the French word in
brackets when appropriate. The word ‘fabulation’ has been
translated as ‘story-telling’.
   As always, Gilles Deleuze provided prom pt and clear answers
to all our questions and we would like to express our thanks for

xviii                                       Translators' introduction
this and for the opportunity to take part in this adventure of time
and movement. We owe a large debt of gratitude to Denise Cole
for the word processing of a manuscript that always lived
dangerously on the margins of legibility. Tippin Beesley did the
same for a part of the manuscript. Simon Beesley provided
support and assistance when it seemed it would never end. Martin
Joughlin was constructive. Caroline Davidson is always told that
this is the last one but continues to be tolerant. The translation is
dedicated to Michael Galeta and Dorothy Thompson who have
seen a lot of films.
                                                      Hugh Tomlinson
                                                        Robert Galeta

Notes
1 Cinéma I: The Movement-Image, translated Hugh Tomlinson and
  Barbara Habberjam, London: The Athlone Press, 1986.
2 Reda Bensmaia, Magazine littéraire, No. 257, septembre, 1988, p. 57.
3 See Gilles Deleuze, Francis Bacon: Logique de la Sensation, 2 volumes,
  Paris: Edition de la Différence, 1981.
4 See ‘Signes et événements’, Magazine littéraire. No. 257, septembre
   1988, p. 17.'
5 ibid., p. 23.
6 loc cit.

1 Beyond the movement-image

                                 i
Against those who defined Italian neo-realism by its social
content, Bazin put forward the fundamental requirement of
formal aesthetic criteria. According to him, it was a matter of a
new form of reality, said to be dispersive, elliptical, errant or
wavering, working in blocs, with deliberately weak connections
and floating events. The real was no longer represented or
reproduced but ‘aimed at’. Instead of representing an already
deciphered real, neo-realism aimed at an always ambiguous, to be
deciphered, real; this is why the sequence shot tended to replace
the montage of representations. Neo-realism therefore invented
a new type of image, which Bazin suggested calling ‘fact-image’.1'
This thesis of Bazin’s was infinitely richer than the one that he was
challenging, and showed that neo-realism did not limit itself to
the content of its earliest examples. But what the two theses had in
common was the posing of the problem at the level of reality:
neo-realism produced a formal or material ‘additional reality’.
However, we are not sure that the problem arises at the level of
the real, whether in relation to form or content. Is it not rather at
the level of the ‘mental’, in terms of thought? If all the
movement-images, perceptions, actions and affects underwent
such an upheaval, was this not first of all because a new element
burst on to the scene which was to prevent perception being
extended into action in order to put it in contact with thought,
and, gradually, was to subordinate the image to the demands of
new signs which would take it beyond movement?
  When Zavattini defines neo-realism as an art of encounter —
fragmentary, ephemeral, piecemeal, missed encounters —what
does he mean? It is true of encounters in Rossellini’s Paisa, or De
Sica’s Bicycle Thief. And in Umberto D, De Sica constructs the
famous sequence quoted as an example by Bazin: the young maid
going into the kitchen in the morning, making a series of
mechanical, weary gestures, cleaning a bit, driving the ants away
from a water fountain, picking up the coffee grinder, stretching
out her foot to close the door with her toe. And her eyes meet her
pregnant woman’s belly, and it is as though all the misery in the

2                                                       Cinema 2
world were going to be born. This is how, in an ordinary or
everyday situation, in the course of a series of gestures, which are
insignificant but all the more obedient to simple sensory-motor
schemata, what has suddenly been brought about is a pure optical
situation to which the litde maid has no response or reacdon. The
eyes, the belly, that is what an encounter is . . . O f course,
encounters can take very different forms, even achieving the
exceptional, but they follow the same formula. Take, for ex­
ample, Rossellini’s great quartet, which, far from marking an
abandonment of neo-realism, on the contrary, perfects it. Ger­
many Year 0 presents a child who visits a foreign country (this is
why the film was criticized for not maintaining the social mooring
which was held to be a condition of neo-realism), and who dies
from what he sees. Stromboli presents a foreign woman whose
reveladon of the island will be all the more profound because she
cannot react in a way that softens or compensates for the violence
of what she sees, the intensity and the enormity of the tunnyfishing (‘It was aw ful. . .’), the panic-inducing power of th e'
eruption (‘I am finished, I am afraid, what mystery, what beauty,
my God . . .’). Europe 51 shows a bourgeoise woman who,
following the death of her child, crosses various spaces and
experiences the tenement, the slum and the factory (‘I thought I
was seeing convicts’). H er glances relinquish the practical func­
tion of a mistress of a house who arranges things and beings, and
pass through every state of an internal vision, affliction, com­
passion, love, happiness, acceptance, extending to the psychiatric
hospital where she is locked up at the end of a new trial of Joan of
Arc: she sees, she has learnt to see. The Lonely Woman [Viaggio in
Italia] follows a female tourist struck to the core by the simple
 unfolding of images or visual clichés in which she discovers
something unbearable, beyond the limit of what she can person­
ally bear.2 This is a cinema of the seer and no longer of the agent
 [de voyant, non plus d’actant].
    What defines neo-realism is this build-up of purely optical
 situations (and sound ones, although there was no synchronized
 sound at the start of neo-realism), which are fundamentally
 distinct from the sensory-motor situations of the action-image in
 the old realism. It is perhaps as important as the conquering of a
 purely optical space in painting, with impressionism. It may be
 objected that the viewer has always found himself in front of
 ‘descriptions’, in front of optical and sound-images, and nothing
 more. But this is not the point. For the characters themselves

Beyond the movement-image                                          3
reacted to situations; even when one of them found himself
reduced to helplessness, bound and gagged, as a result of the ups
and downs of the action. What the viewer perceived therefore was
a sensory-motor image in which he took a greater or lesser part by
identification with the characters. Hitchcock had begun the
inversion of this point of view by including the viewer in the film.
But it is now that the identification is actually inverted: the
character has become a kind of viewer. He shifts, runs and
becomes animated in vain, the situation he is in outstrips his
motor capacities on all sides, and makes him see and hear what is
no longer subject to the rules of a response or an action. He
records rather than reacts. He is prey to a vision, pursued by it or
pursuing it, rather than engaged in an action. Visconti’s Obsession
rightly stands as the forerunner of neo-realism; and what first
strikes the viewer is the way in which the black-clad heroine is
possessed by an almost hallucinatory sensuality. She is closer to a
visionary, a sleepwalker, than to a seductress or a lover (similarly,
later, the Countess in Senso).
   In Volume 1 the crisis of the action-image was defined by a
number of characteristics: the form of the trip/ballad,3* the
multiplication of clichés, the events that hardly concern those
they happen to, in short the slackening of the sensory-motor
connections. All these characteristics were important but only in
the sense of preliminary conditions. They made possible, but did
not yet constitute, the new image. What constitutes this is the
purely optical and sound situation which takes the place of the
faltering sensory-motor situations. The role of the child in
neo-realism has been pointed out, notably in De Sica (and later in
France with Truffaut); this is because, in the adult world, the
child is affected by a certain motor helplessness, but one which
makes him all the more capable of seeing and hearing. Similarly,
if everyday banality is so important, it is because, being subject to
sensory-motor schemata which are automatic and preestablished, it is all the more liable, on the least disturbance of
equilibrium between stimulus and response (as in the scene with
the little maid in Umberto D), suddenly to free itself from the laws
of this schema and reveal itself in a visual and sound nakedness,
crudeness and brutality which make it unbearable, giving it the
 pace of a dream or a nightmare. There is, therefore, a necessary
passage from the crisis of image-action to the pure optical-sound
image. Sometimes it is an evolution from one aspect to the other:
beginning with trip/ballad films [films de bal(l)ade] with the

4                                                           Cinema 2
sensory-motor connections slackened, and then reaching purely
optical and sound situations. Sometimes the two coexist in the
same film like two levels, the first of which serves merely as a
melodic line for the second.
   It is in this sense that Visconti, Antonioni and Fellini are
definitely part of neo-realism, in spite of all their differences.
Obsession, the forerunner, is not merely one of the versions of a
famous American thriller, or the transposition of this novel to the
plain of the Po.4 In Visconti’s film, we witness a very subtle
change, the beginnings of a mutation of the general notion of
situation. In the old realism or on the model of the acdon-image,
objects and setdngs already had a reality of their own, but it was a
functional reality, strictly determined by the demands of the
situadon, even if these demands were as much poetic as dramatic
(for instance, the emotional value of objects in Kazan). The
situadon was, then, direcdy extended into action and passion.
After Obsession, however, something appears that continues to
develop in Visconti: objects and settings [milieux] take on an
autonomous, material reality which gives them an importance in
themselves. It is therefore essential that not only the viewer but
the protagonists invest the settings and the objects with their gaze,
that they see and hear the things and the people, in order for
action or passion to be born, erupting in a pre-existing daily life.
Hence the arrival of the hero of Obsession, who takes a kind of
visual possession of the inn, or, in Rocco and his Brothers, the arrival
of the family who, with all their eyes and ears, try to take in the
huge station and the unknown city: this will be a constant theme
in Visconti’s work, this ‘inventory’ of a setting — its objects,
furniture, tools, etc. So the situation is not extended directly into
action: it is no longer sensory-motor, as in realism, but primarily
optical and of sound, invested by the senses, before action takes
shape in it, and uses or confronts its elements. Everything
remains real in this neo-realism (whether it is film set or exteriors)
but, between the reality of the setting and that of the action, it is
 no longer a motor extension which is established, but rather a
 dreamlike connection through the intermediary of the liberated
 sense organs.5 It is as if the action floats in the situation, rather
 than bringing it to a conclusion or strengthening it. This is the
 source of Visconti’s visionary aestheticism. And The Earth Trembles
 confirms these new parameters in a singular way. O f course the
 fishermen’s situation, the struggle they are engaged in, and the
 birth of a class conciousness are revealed in this first episode, the

Beyond the movement-image                                            5
only one that Visconti completed. But this embryonic ‘communist
consciousness' here depends less on a struggle with nature and
between men than on a grand vision of man and nature, of their
perceptible and sensual unity, from which the ‘rich’ are excluded
and which constitutes the hope of the revolution, beyond the
setbacks of the floating action: a Marxist romanticism.6
   In Antonioni, from his first great work, Story of a Love Affair, the
police investigation, instead o f proceeding by flashback, trans­
forms the actions into optical and sound descriptions, whilst the
tale itself is transformed into actions which are dislocated in time
(the episode where the maid talks while repeating her tired
gestures, or the famous scene with the lifts).7 And Antonioni’s art
will continue to evolve in two directions: an astonishing develop­
ment of the idle periods of everyday banality; then, starting with
The Eclipse, a treatment of limit-situations which pushes them to
the point of dehumanized landscapes, of emptied spaces that
might be seen as having absorbed characters and actions,
retaining only a geophysical description, an abstract inventory of
them. As for Fellini, from his earliest films, it is not simply the
spectacle which tends to overflow the real, it is the everyday which
continually organizes itself into a travelling spectacle, and the
sensory-motor linkages which give way to a succession of varieties
subject to their own laws of passage. Barthélémy Amengual
produces a formula which is true for the first half of this work:
‘The real becomes spectacle or spectacular, and fascinates for
being the real thing . . . The everyday is identified widi the
spectacular .. . Fellini achieves the deliberate confusion of the
real and the spectacle’ by denying the heterogeneity of the two
worlds, by effacing not only distance, but the distinction between
the spectator and the spectacle.H
   The optical and sound situations of neo-realism contrast with
the strong sensory-motor situations of traditional realism. The
space of a sensory-motor situation is a setting which is already
specified and presupposes an action which discloses it, or
prompts a reaction which adapts to or modifies it. But a purely
optical or sound situation becomes established in what we might
call ‘any-space-whatever’, whether disconnected, or emptied (we
find the passage from one to the other in The Eclipse, where the
disconnected bits of space lived by the heroine —stock exchange,
Africa, air terminal —are reunited at the end in an empty space
which blends into the white surface). In neo-realism, the sensorymotor connections are now valid only by virtue of the upsets that

6                                                          Cinema 2
affect, loosen, unbalance, or uncouple them: the crisis of the
action-image. No longer being induced by an action, any more
than it is extended into one, the optical and sound situation is,
therefore, neither an index nor a synsign. There is a new breed of
signs, opsigns and sonsigns. And clearly these new signs refer to
very varied images —sometimes everyday banality, sometimes
exceptional or limit-circumstances — but, above all, subjective
images, memories of childhood, sound and visual dreams or
fantasies, where the character does not act without seeing himself
acting, complicit viewer of the role he himself is playing, in the
style of Fellini. Sometimes, as in Antonioni, they are objective
images, in the manner of a report, even if this is a report of an
accident, defined by a geometrical frame which now allows only
the existence of relations of measurement and distance between
its elements, persons and objects, this time transforming the
action into displacement of figures in space (for instance, the
search for the vanished woman in The Adventure)? It is in this
sense that the critical objectivism of Antonioni may be contrasted
with the knowing subjectivism of Fellini. There would be, then,
two kinds of opsigns, reports [constats] and ‘instats’,111* the former
giving a vision with depth, at a distance, tending towards
abstraction, the other a close, flat-on vision inducing involvement.
This opposition corresponds in some respects to the alternative as
defined by Worringer: abstraction or Einfühlung. Antonioni’s
aesthetic visions are inseparable from an objective critique (we are
sick with Eros, because Eros is himself objectively sick: what has
love become that a man or a woman should emerge from it so
disabled, pitiful and suffering, and act and react as badly at the
beginning as at the end, in a corrupt society?), whilst Fellini’s
visions are inseparable from an ‘empathy’, a subjective sympathy
(embrace even that decadence which means that one loves only in
dreams or in recollection, sympathize with those kinds of love, be
an accomplice of decadence, and even provoke it, in order to save
something, perhaps, as far as is possible . . .).11 On both sides
these are higher, more important, problems than commonplaces
about solitude and incommunicability.
   The distinctions, on one hand between the banal and the
extreme, and on the other between the subjective and the
objective, have some value, but only relatively. They are valid for
 an image or a sequence, but not for the whole. They are still valid
 in relation to the action-image, which they bring into question,
but already they are no longer wholly valid in relation to the new

Beyond the movement-image                                            7
image that is coming into being. They mark poles between which
there is continual passage. In fact, the most banal or everyday
situations release accumulated ‘dead forces’ equal to the life force
of a limit-situadon (thus, in De Sica’s Umberto D, the sequence
where the old man examines himself and thinks he has fever). In
addition, the idle periods in Antonioni do not merely show the
banalities of daily life, they reap the consequences or the effect of
a remarkable event which is reported only through itself without
being explained (the break-up of a couple, the sudden dis­
appearance of a woman . . .). The method of report in Antonioni
always has this function of bringing idle periods and empty spaces
together: drawing all the consequences from a decisive past
experience, once it is done and everything has been said. ‘When
everything has been said, when the main scene seems over, there
is what comes afterwards . . .’12
   As for the distinction between subjective and objective, it also
tends to lose its importance, to the extent that the optical situation
or visual description replaces the motor action. We run in fact
into a principle of indeterminability, of indiscernibility: we no
longer know what is imaginary or real, physical or mental, in the
situation, not because they are confused, but because we do not
have to know and there is no longer even a place from which to
ask. It is as if the real and the imaginary were running after each
other, as if each was being reflected in the other, around a point of
indiscernibility. We will return to this point, but, already, when
Robbe-Grillet provides his great theory of descriptions, he begins
by defining a traditional ‘realist’ descripdon: it is that which
presupposes the independence of its object, and hence proposes a
discernibility of the real and the imaginary (they can become
confused, but none the less by right they remain distinct).
Neo-realist descripdon in the nouveau roman is completely
different: since it replaces its own object, on the one hand it erases
or destroys its reality which passes into the imaginary, but on the
other hand it powerfully brings out all the reality which the
imaginary or the mental create through speech and vision.” The
imaginary and the real became indiscernible. Robbe-Grillet will
become more and more conscious of this in his reflection on the
nouveau roman and the cinema: the most objectivist determinants
do not prevent their realizing a ‘total subjectivity’. This is what was
embryonic from the start of Italian neo-realism, and what makes
 Labarthe remark that Last Year in Marienbad is the last of the great
 neo-realist films.14

8                                                         Cinema 2
   We can already see in Fellini that a particular image is clearly
subjective, mental, a recollection or fantasy — but it is not
organized into a spectacle without becoming objective, without
going behind the scenes, into ‘the reality of the spectacle, of those
who make it, who live from it, who are absorbed in it’: the mental
world of a character is so filled up by other proliferating
characters that it becomes inter-mental, and through flattening of
perspectives ends ‘in a neutral, impersonal vision . . . all our
world’ (hence the importance of the telepath in S'/fc).1’ Conver­
sely, in Antonioni, it is as if the most objective images are not
formed without becoming mental, and going into a strange,
invisible subjectivity. It is not merely that the method of report
has to be applied to feelings as they exist in a society, and to draw
from them such consequences as are internally developed in
characters: Eros sick is a story of feelings which go from the
objective to the subjective, and are internalized in everyone. In
this respect, Antonioni is much closer to Nietzsche than to Marx;
he is the only contemporary author to have taken up the
Nietzschean project of a real critique of morality, and this thanks
to a ‘symptomatologist’ method. But, from yet another point of
view, it is noticeable that Antonioni’s objective images, which
impersonally follow a becoming, that is, a development of
consequences in a story [recit\, none the less are subject to rapid
breaks, interpolations and ‘infinitesimal injections of atemporality’: for example, the lift scene in Story of a Love Affair.
We are returned once more to the first form of the any-spacewhatever: disconnected space. The connection of the parts of
space is not given, because it can come about only from the
subjective point of view of a character who is, nevertheless,
absent, or has even disappeared, not simply out of frame, but
passed into the void. In The Outcry, Irm a is not only the obsessive,
subjective thought of the hero who runs away to forget, but the
imaginary gaze under which this flight takes place and connects
its own segments: a gaze which becomes real again at the moment
of death. And above all in The Adventure, the vanished woman
causes an indeterminable gaze to weigh on the couple —which
gives them the continual feeling of being spied on, and which
explains the lack of co-ordination of their objective movements,
when they flee whilst pretending to look for her. Again in
Identification of a Woman, the whole quest or investigation takes
place under the presumed gaze of the departed woman, concern­
ing whom we will not know, in the marvellous images at the end,

Beyond the movement-image                                          9
whether or not she has seen the hero curled up in the lift cage.
The imaginary gaze makes the real something imaginary, at the
same time as it in turn becomes real and gives us back some
reality. It is like a circuit which exchanges, corrects, selects and
sends us off again. From The Eclipse onwards, the any-spacewhatever had achieved a second form: empty or deserted space.
What happened is that, from one result to the next, the characters
were objectively emptied: they are suffering less from the absence
of another than from their absence from themselves (for ex­
ample, The Passenger). Hence, this space refers back again to the
lost gaze of the being who is absent from the world as much as
from himself, and, as Oilier says in a phrase which is true for the
whole of Antonioni’s work, replaces ‘traditional drama with a
kind of optical drama lived by the character’.16
   In short, pure optical and sound situations can have two poles —
objective and subjective, real and imaginary, physical and mental.
But they give rise to opsigns and sonsigns, which bring the poles
into continual contact, and which, in one direction or the other,
guarantee passages and conversions, tending towards a point of
indiscernibility (and not of confusion). Such a system of exchange
between the imaginary and the real appears fully in Visconti’s
White Nights.'1
   The French new wave cannot be defined unless we try to see
how it has retraced the path of Italian neo-realism for its own
purposes —even if it meant going in other directions as well. In
fact, the new wave, on a first approximation, takes up the
previous route again: from a loosening of the sensory-motor link
(the stroll or wandering, the ballad, the events which concern no
one, etc.), to the rise of optical and sound situations. Here again, a
cinema of seeing replaces action. If Tati belongs to the new wave,
it is because, after two ballad-films, he fully isolates what was
taking shape in these —a burlesque whose impetus comes from
purely optical and, in particular, sound, situations. Godard
begins with some extraordinary ballads, from Breathless to Pierrot
lefou, and tends to draw out of them a whole world of opsigns and
sonsigns which already constitute the new image (in Pierrot lefou,
the passage from the sensory-motor loosening, ‘I dunno what to
do’, to the pure poem sung and danced, ‘the line of your hips’).
And these images, touching or terrible, take on an ever greater
autonomy after Made in USA', which may be summed up as
follows: ‘A witness providing us with a series of reports with
neither conclusion nor logical connection . . . without really

10                                                          Cinema 2
effective reactions.’"’ Claude Oilier says that, with Made in USA,
the violently hallucinatory character of Godard’s work is affirmed
 for itself, in an art of description which is always being renewed
and always replacing its object.19 This descripdve objectivism is
just as critical and even didactic, sustaining a series of films, from
 Two or Three Things I Know about Her, to Slow Motion, where
 reflection is not simply focused on the content of the image but on
 its form, its means and functions, its falsifications and creativities,
 on the relations within it between the sound dimension and the
 optical. Godard has little patience with or sympathy for fantasies:
 Slow Motion will show us the decomposition of a sexual fantasy
 into its separate, objective elements, visual, and then of sound.
 But this objectivism never loses its aesthetic force. Initially serving
 a politics of the image, the aesthetic force is powerfully brought
 out for its own sake in Passion: the free build-up of pictorial and
 musical images as tableaux vivants, whilst at the other end the
 sensory-motor linkages are beset by inhibitions (the stuttering of
 the female worker and the boss’s cough). Passion, in this sense,
 brings to its greatest intensity what was already taking shape in Le
 Mépris, when we witnessed the sensory-motor failure of the
 couple in the traditional drama, at the same time as the optical
 representation of the drama of Ulysses and the gaze of the gods,
 with Fritz Lang as the intercessor, was soaring upwards.
 Throughout all these films, there is a creative evolution which is
 that of a visionary Godard.
     For Rivette, Le pont du Nord has exactly the same perfection of
 provisional summary as Passion for Godard. It is the ballad of two
 strange women strollers to whom a grand vision of the stone lions
 of Paris will present pure optical and sound situations, in a kind of
 malicious snakes and ladders where they replay the hallucinatory
 drama of Don Quixote. But, from the same starting-point,
 Rivette and Godard seem to mark out the two contrasting sides.
 This is because, with Rivette, the break in the sensory-motor
 situations — to the benefit of optical and sound situations —is
 connected to a knowing subjectivism, an empathy, which most
 frequently works through fantasies, memories, or pseudo­
 memories, and finds in them a unique gaiety and lightness (Celine
 and Julie Go Boating is certainly one of the greatest French comic
 films, along with the work of Tati). Whilst Godard drew inspir­
 ation from the strip cartoon at its most cruel and cutting, Rivette
 clothes his unchanging theme of an international conspiracy in an
 atmosphere of fable and children’s games. Already in Paris

Beyond the movement-image                                         11
Belongs to Us, the stroll culminates in a twilight fantasy where the
cityscape has no reality or connections other than those given by
our dream. And Celine andJulie Go Boating, after the stroll-pursuit
of the girl with a double, has us witness the pure spectacle of her
fantasy, a young girl whose life is threatened in a family novel.
The double, or rather the woman double [la double], is herself
present with the aid of magic sweets; then, thanks to the
alchemical potion, she introduces herself into the spectacle which
no longer has viewers, but only behind the scenes, and finally
saves the child from her appointed fate as a little boat takes her off
into the distance: there is no more cheerful a fairy-tale. Twilight
does not even have to get us into the spectacle; the heroines of the
spectacle, the solar woman and the lunar woman, who have
already passed into the real, under the sign of the magic stone
track down, make disappear or kill the surviving characters who
would still be capable of being witnesses.
   Rivette could be said to be the most French of the new wave
authors. But ‘French’ here has nothing to do with what has been
called the French quality. It is rather in the sense of the pre-war
French school, when it discovers, following the painter Delaunay,
that there is no struggle between light and darkness (expres­
sionism), but an alternation and duel of the sun and the moon,
which are both light, one constituting a circular, continuous
movement of complementary colours, the other a faster and
uneven movement of jarring, iridescent colours, the two together
making up and projecting an eternal mirage on to the earth.20
This is the case with Twilight. This is the case with Merry-go-round,
where the description made of light and colours constantly begins
again in order to obliterate its objects. Rivette takes this to the
highest level in his art of light. All his heroines are daughters of
fire, all his work is under this sign. In the end, if he is the most
French of film-makers, it is in the sense that Gérard de Nerval
could be called the supreme French poet, could even be called the
‘Good Gerard’, singer of the Ile de France, just like Rivette, singer
of Paris and its rustic streets. When Proust asks himself what there
is behind all these names that were applied to Nerval, he replies
that in fact it is some of the greatest poetry that there has been in
the world, and madness itself or the mirage to which Nerval
succumbed. For, if Nerval needs to see, and to walk in the Valois,
he needs this like some reality which has to ‘verify’ his hallucina­
tory vision, to the point where we no longer have any idea what is
present or past, mental or physical. He needs the Ile de France as

12                                                         Cinema 2
the real that his speech and his vision create, as the objective in his
pure subjectivity: a ‘dream lightning’, a ‘bluish and purple
atmosphere’, solar and lunar.21 The same goes for Rivette and his
need of Paris. Here again, we have to conclude that the difference
between the objective and the subjective has only a provisional,
relative value, from the point of view of the optical-sound image.
The most subjective, the knowing subjectivism of Rivette, is
utterly objective, because it creates the real through the force of
visual description. And conversely what is most objective, God­
ard’s critical objectivism, was already completely subjective,
because in place of the real object it put visual description, and
made it go ‘inside’ the person or object (Two or Three Things I Know
about Her).22 On both sides, description tends towards a point of
indiscemibility of the real and the imaginary.
   A final question: why does the collapse of traditional sensorymotor situations, in the form these had in the old realism or in the
action-image, allow only pure optical and sound situations,
opsigns and sonsigns, to emerge? It will be noted that RobbeGrillet, at least at the beginning of his reflections, was even
harsher: he renounced not merely the tactile, but even sounds
and colours as inept for the report, too tied to emotions and
reactions, and he kept only visual descriptions which operated
 through lines, surfaces and sizes.23 The cinema was one of the
causes of his evolution, because it made him discover the
 descriptive power of colour and sounds, as these replace,
 obliterate and re-create the object itself. But, even more, it is the
 tactile which can constitute a pure sensory image, on condition
 that the hand relinquishes its prehensile and motor functions to
 content itself with a pure touching. In Herzog, we witness an
 extraordinary effort to present to the view specifically tactile
 images which characterize the situation of ‘defenceless’ beings,
 and unite with the grand visions of those suffering from
 hallucinations.24 But it is Bresson, in a quite different way, who
 makes touch an object of view in itself. Bresson’s visual space is
 fragmented and disconnected, but its parts have, step by step, a
 manual continuity. The hand, then, takes on a role in the image
 which goes infinitely beyond the sensory-motor demands of the
 action, which takes the place of the face itself for the purpose of
 affects, and which, in the area of perception, becomes the mode
 of construction of a space which is adequate to the decisions of the
 spirit. Thus, in Pickpocket, it is the hands of the three accomplices
 which connect the parts of space in the Gare de Lyon, not exactly

Beyond the movement-image                                         13
through their seizing an object, but through brushing it, arresting
it in its movement, giving it another direction, passing it on and
making it circulate in this space. The hand doubles its prehensile
function (of object) by a connective function (of space); but, from
that moment, it is the whole eye which doubles its optical function
by a specifically ‘grabbing’ [haptique] one, if we follow Riegl’s
formula for indicating a touching which is specific to the gaze. In
Bresson, opsigns and sonsigns cannot be separated from genuine
tactisigns which perhaps regulate their relations (this is the
originality of Bresson’s any-space-whatevers).

                                 2
Although he was subject, from the outset, to the influence of
certain American authors, Ozu built up in a Japanese context a
body of work which was the first to develop pure optical and
sound situations (even so he came quite late to the talkie, in 1936).
The Europeans did not imitate him, but came back to him later
via their own methods. He none the less remains the inventor of
opsigns and sonsigns. The work borrows a trip/ballad [bal(l)ade]
form, train journey, taxi ride, bus trip, a journey by bicycle or on
foot: the grandparents’ return journey from the provinces to
Tokyo, the girl’s last holiday with her mother, an old man’s jaunt
. .. But the object is everyday banality taken as family life in the
Japanese house. Camera movements take place less and less
frequently: tracking shots are slow, low ‘blocs of movement’; the
always low camera is usually fixed, frontal or at an unchanging
angle: dissolves are abandoned in favour of the simple cut?* What
might appear to be a return to ‘primitive cinema’ is just as much
the elaboration of an astonishingly temperate modern style: the
montage-cut, which will dominate modern cinema, is a purely
optical passage or punctuation between images, working directly,
sacrificing all synthetic effects. The sound is also affected, since
the montage-cut may culminate in the ‘one shot, one line’
procedure borrowed from American cinema. But there, for
instance, in Lubitsch, it was a m atter of an action-image func­
tioning as an index, whereas Ozu modifies the meaning of the
procedure, which now shows the absence of plot: the actionimage disappears in favour of the purely visual image of what a
character is, and the sound image of what he says, completely

14                                                        Cinema 2
banal nature and conservation constituting the essentials of the
script (this is why the only things that count are the choice of
actors according to their physical and moral appearance, and the
establishment of any dialogue whatever, apparently without a
precise subject-matter.215
   It is clear that this method immediately presents idle periods,
and leads to their increase in the course of the film. O f course, as
the film proceeds, it might be thought that the idle periods are no
longer important simply for themselves but recoup the effect of
something important: the shot or the line would, on this view, be
extended by a quite long silence or emptiness. But it is definitely
not the case, with Ozu, that we get the remarkable and the
ordinary, limit-situations and banal ones, the form er having an
effect on, or purposely insinuating themselves into, the latter. We
cannot follow Paul Schrader when he contrasts, like two phases,
‘the everyday’ on one hand, and, on the other, ‘the moment of
decision’, ‘the disparity’, which introduce an inexplicable break or
emotion into daily banality.27 This distinction would seem strictly
more valid for neo-realism. In Ozu, everything is ordinary or
banal, even death and the dead who are the object of a natural
forgetting. The famous scenes of sudden tears (that of the father
in An Autumn Afternoon who starts to weep silently after his
daughter’s wedding, that of the daughter in Late Spring who half
smiles as she looks at her sleeping father, then finds herself on the
verge of tears, that of the daughter in Dernier caprice who makes a
sharp comment about her dead father, then bursts into tears) do
not mark out a strong period which might be contrasted with the
weak periods in the flow of life, and there is no reason to suggest
the emergence of a repressed emotion as ‘decisive action’.
   The philosopher Leibniz (who was not unaware of the exist­
ence of the Chinese philosophers) showed that the world is made
up of series which are composed and which converge in a very
regular way, according to ordinary laws. However, the series and
sequences are apparent to us only in small sections, and in a
disrupted or mixed-up order, so that we believe in breaks,
disparities and discrepancies as in things that are out of the
ordinary. Maurice Leblanc wrote a very good serial which comes
close to a Zen kind of wisdom: the hero, Balthazar, ‘professor of
 everyday philosophy’, teaches that there is nothing remarkable or
 exceptional in life, that the oddest adventures are easily
explained, and that everything is made up of ordinary things.28 It
isjust that we have to admit that, because the linkages of the terms

Beyond the movement-image                                          15
in the series are naturally weak, they are constantly upset and do
not appear in order. An ordinary term goes out of sequence, and
emerges in the middle of another sequence of ordinary things in
relation to which it takes on the appearance of a strong moment, a
remarkable or complex point. It is men who upset the regularity
of series, the continuity of the universe. There is a time for life, a
time for death, a time for the mother, a time for the daughter, but
men mix them up, make them appear in disorder, set them up in
conflicts. This is Ozu’s thinking: life is simple, and man never
stops complicating it by ‘disturbing still water’ (as in the three
companions in Late Autumn). And if, after the war, Ozu’s work
does not at all fall into the decline that has sometimes been
suggested, it is because the post-war period helps confirm this
thinking, but by renewing it, by reinforcing and going beyond the
theme of conflicting generations: American ordinariness helps
break down what is ordinary about Japan, a clash of two everyday
realities which is even expressed in colour, when Coca-Cola red or
plastic yellow violently interrupt the series of washed-out, unemphatic tones of Japanese life.29 And, as the character says in The
Flavour of Green Tea over Rice: what if the opposite had occurred, if
saki, samisen and geisha wigs had suddenly been introduced into
the everyday banality of Americans . . .? On this point it seems to
us that nature does not, as Schrader believes, intervene in a
decisive moment or in a clear break with everyday man. The
splendour of nature, of a snow-covered mountain, tells us one
thing only: everything is ordinary and regular, everything is
everyday! Nature is happy to renew what man has broken, she
restores what man sees shattered. And, when a character emerges
for a moment from a family conflict or a wake to contemplate the
snow-covered mountain, it is as if he were seeking to restore to
order the series upset in his house but reinstated by an unchang­
ing, regular nature, as in an equation that provides us with the
reason for apparent breaks, ‘for the turns and returns, the highs
and the lows’, as Leibniz puts it.
   Daily life allows only weak sensory-motor connections to
survive, and replaces the action-image by pure optical and sound
images, opsigns and sonsigns. In Ozu, there is no universal line
which connects moments of decision, and links the dead to the
living, as in Mizoguchi; nor is there any breathing space or
encompasser to contain a profound question, as in Kurosawa.
Ozu’s spaces are raised to the state of any-space-whatevers,
whether by disconnection, or vacuity (here again Ozu may be

16                                                         Cinema 2
considered one of the first inventors). The false continuity of
gaze, of direction and even of the position of objects are constant
and systematic. One case of camera movement gives a good
example of disconnection: in Early Summer, the heroine goes
forward on tiptoe to surprise someone in a restaurant, the camera
drawing back in order to keep her in the centre of the frame; then
the camera goes foward to a corridor, but this corridor is no
longer in the restaurant, it is in the house of the heroine who has
already returned home. As for the em pty. spaces, without
characters or movement, they are interiors emptied of their
occupants, deserted exteriors or landscapes in nature. In Ozu
they take on an autonomy which they do not immediately possess
even in neo-realism, which accords them an apparent value which
is relative (in relation to a story) or consequential (once the action
is done with). They reach the absolute, as instances of pure
contemplation, and immediately bring about the identity of the
mental and the physical, the real and the imaginary, the subject
and the object, the world and the I. They correspond in part to
what Schrader calls ‘cases of stasis’, Noël Burch ‘pillow-shots’,
Richie ‘still lifes’. The question is to know whether there is not all
the same a distinction to be made at the centre of this category
itself.30
   Between an empty space or landscape and a still life properly so
called there are certainly many similarities, shared functions and
imperceptible transitions. But it is not the same thing; a still life
cannot be confused with a landscape. An empty space owes its
importance above all to the absence of a possible content, whilst
the still life is defined by the presence and composition of objects
which are wrapped up in themselves or become their own
container: as in the long shot of the vase almost at the end of Late
Spring. Such objects are not necessarily surrounded by a void, but
may allow characters to live and speak in a certain soft focus, like
the still life with vase and fruit in The Woman of Tokyo, or the one
with fruit and golf-clubs in What Did the Lady Forget? It is like
Cézanne, the landscapes —empty or with gaps —do not have the
same principles of composition as the full still lifes. There comes a
point when one hesitates between the two, so completely can their
functions overlap each other and so subtle are the transitions that
can be made: for instance, in Ozu, the marvellous composition
with the bottle and the lighthouse, at the beginning of A Story of
Floating Weeds. The distinction is none the less that of the empty
and the full, which brings into play all the nuances or relations in

Beyond the movement-image                                            17
Chinese and Japanese thought, as two aspects of contemplation.
If empty spaces, interiors or exteriors, constitute purely optical
(and sound) situations, still lifes are the reverse, the correlate.
   The vase in Late Spring is interposed between the daughter’s
half smile and the beginning of her tears. There is becoming,
change, passage. But the form of what changes does not itself
change, does not pass on. This is time, time itself, ‘a litde dme in its
pure state’: a direct time-image, which gives what changes the
unchanging form in which the change is produced. The night
that changes into day, or the reverse, recalls a sdll life on which
light falls, either fading or getting stronger (Thai Night’s Wife,
Passing Fancy). The still life is time, for everything that changes is
in time, but time does not itself change, it could itself change only
in another time, indefinitely. At the point where the cinematogra­
phic image most direcdy confronts the photo, it also becomes
most radically distinct from it. Ozu’s still lifes endure, have a
duration, over ten seconds of the vase: this duration of the vase is
precisely the representation of that which endures, through the
succession of changing states. A bicycle may also endure; that is,
represent the unchanging form of that which moves, so long as it
is at rest, motionless, stood against the wall (A Story of Floating
Weeds). The bicycle, the vase and the still lifes are the pure and
direct images of time. Each is time, on each occasion, under
various conditions of that which changes in time. Time is the full,
that is, the unalterable form filled by change. Time is ‘the visual
reserve of events in their appropriateness’.31 Antonioni spoke of
‘the horizon of events’, but noted that in the West the word has a
double meaning, man’s banal horizon and an inaccessible and
always receding cosmological horizon. Hence the division of
western cinema into European humanism and American science
fiction.32 He suggested that it is not the same for the Japanese,
who are hardly interested in science fiction: one and the same
horizon links the cosmic to the everyday, the durable to the
changing, one single and identical time as the unchanging form
of that which changes. It is in this way that nature or stasis was
defined, according to Schrader, as the form that links the
everyday in ‘something unified and perm anent’. There is no need
at all to call on a transcendence. In everyday banality, the
action-image and even the movement-image tend to disappear in
favour of pure optical situations, but these reveal connections of a
new type, which are no longer sensory-motor and which bring the
emancipated senses into direct relation with time and thought.

18                                                         Cinema 2
This is the very special extension of the opsign: to make time and
thought perceptible, to make them visible and of sound.

                                 3
A purely optical and sound situation does not extend into action,
any more than it is induced by an action. It makes us grasp, it is
supposed to make us grasp, something intolerable and unbear­
able. Not a brutality as nervous aggression, an exaggerated vio­
lence that can always be extracted from the sensory-motor
relations in the action-image. Nor is it a matter of scenes of terror,
although there are sometimes corpses and blood. It is a matter of
something too powerful, or too unjust, but sometimes also too
beautiful, and which henceforth outstrips our sensory-motor
capacities. Stromboli: a beauty which is too great for us, like too
strong a pain. It can be a limit-situation, the eruption of the
volcano, but also the most banal, a plain factory, a wasteland. In
Godard’s Les carabiniers the girl militant recites a few revolution­
ary slogans, so many clichés; but she is so beautiful, of a beauty
which is unbearable for her torturers who have to cover up her
face with a handkerchief. And this handkerchief, lifted again by
breath and whisper (‘Brothers, brothers, brothers . . .’), itself be­
comes unbearable for us the viewers. In any event something has
become too strong in the image. Romanticism had already set out
this aim for itself: grasping the intolerable o r the unbearable, the
empire of poverty, and thereby becoming visionary, to produce a
means of knowledge and action out of pure vision.33
   Nevertheless, are there not equal amounts of fantasy and
dreaming in what we claim to see as there are of objective appre­
hending? Moreover, do we not have a subjective sympathy for the
unbearable, an empathy which permeates what we see? But this
means that the unbearable itself is inseparable from a revelation
or an illumination, as from a third eye. Fellini has strong sympa­
thies with decadence, only in so far as he prolongs it, extends its
range, ‘to the intolerable’, and reveals beneath the movements,
faces and gestures a subterranean or extra-terrestrial world, ‘the
tracking shot becoming a means of peeling away, proof of the
unreality of movement’, and the cinema becoming, no longer an
undertaking of recognition [reconnaisance], but of knowledge
[iconnaisance], ‘a science of visual impressions, forcing us to forget

Beyond the movement-image                                        19
our own logic and reunal habits’.*4 Ozu himself is not the
guardian of traditional or reactionary values, he is the greatest
critic of daily life. He picks out the intolerable from the
insignificant itself, provided that he can extend the force of a
contemplation that is full of sympathy or pity across daily life.
The important thing is always that the character or the viewer,
and the two together, become visionaries. The purely optical and
sound situation gives rise to a seeing function, at once fantasy and
report, criticism and compassion, whilst sensory-motor situ­
ations, no matter how violent, are directed to a pragmatic visual
function which ‘tolerates’ or ‘puts up with’ practically anything,
from the moment it becomes involved in a system of actions and
reactions.
   In Japan and Europe, Marxist critics have attacked these films
and their characters for being too passive and negative, in turn
bourgeois, neurotic or marginal, and for having replaced
modifying action with a ‘confused’ vision.3’ And it is true that, in
cinema, characters of the trip/ballad are unconcerned, even by
what happens to them: whether in the style of Rossellini, the
foreign woman who discovers the island, the bourgeoise woman
who discovers the factory; or in the style of Godard, the
Pierrot-le-fou generation. But it is precisely the weakness of the
motor-linkages, the weak connections, that are capable of releas­
ing huge forces of disintegration. These are the characters with a
strange vibrance in Rossellini, strangely well-informed in Godard
and Rivette. In the west as in Japan, they are in the grip of a
mutation, they are themselves mutants. On the subject of Two or
Three Things. . ., Godard says that to describe is to observe
mutations.315 Mutation of Europe after the war, mutation of an
Americanized Japan, mutation of France in ’68: it is not the
cinema that turns away from politics, it becomes completely
political, but in another way. One of the two women strollers in
Rivette’s Pont du Nord has all the characteristics of an unforesee­
able mutant: she has at first the capacity of detecting the Maxes,
the members of the organization for enslaving the world, before
going through a metamorphosis inside a cocoon, then being
drafted into their ranks. Similarly with the ambiguity of the Petit
soldat. A new type of character for a new cinema. It is because
what happens to them does not belong to them and only half
concerns them, because they know how to extract from the event
the part that cannot be reduced to what happens: that part of
inexhaustible possibility that constitutes the unbearable, the

20                                                          Cinema 2
intolerable, the visionary’s part. A new type of actor was needed:
not simply the non-professional actors that neo-realism had
revived at the beginning, but what might be called professional
non-actors, or, better, ‘actor-mediums’, capable of seeing and
showing rather than acting, and either remaining dumb or
undertaking some never-ending conversation, rather than of
replying or following a dialogue (such as, in France, Bulle Ogier
orJean-Pierre Léaud).37
   Neither everyday nor limit-situations are marked by anything
rare or extraordinary. It is just a volcanic island of poor
fishermen. It is just a factory, a school.. . We mix with all that,
even death, even accidents, in our normal life or on holidays. We
see, and we more or less experience, a powerful organization of
poverty and oppression. And we are precisely not without
sensory-motor schemata for recognizing such things, for putting
up with and approving of them and for behaving ourselves
subsequently, taking into account our situation, our capabilities
and our tastes. We have schemata for turning away when it is too
unpleasant, for prompting resignation when it is terrible and for
assimilating when it is too beautiful. It should be pointed out here
that even metaphors are sensory-motor evasions, and furnish us
with something to say when we no longer know what do to: they
are specific schemata of an affective nature. Now this is what a
cliché is. A cliché is a sensory-motor image of the thing. As
Bergson says, we do not perceive the thing or the image in its
entirety, we always perceive less of it, we perceive only what we
are interested in perceiving, or rather what it is in our interest to
perceive, by virtue of our economic interests, ideological beliefs
and psychological demands. We therefore normally perceive
only clichés. But, if our sensory-motor schemata jam or break,
then a different type of image can appear: a pure optical-sound
image, the whole image without metaphor, brings out the thing in
itself, literally, in its excess of horror or beauty, in its radical or
unjustifiable character, because it no longer has to be ‘justified’,
for better or for worse . . . The factory creature gets up, and we
can no longer say ‘Well, people have to work I thought I was
seeing convicts: the factory is a prison, school is a prison, literally,
not metaphorically. You do not have the image of a prison
following one of a school: that would simply be pointing out a
resemblance, a confused relation between two clear images. On
the contrary, it is necessary to discover the separate elements and
relations that elude us at the heart of an unclear image: to show

Beyond the movement-image                                           21
how and in what sense school is a prison, housing estates are
examples of prostitution, bankers killers, photographs tricks —
literally, without metaphor.38 This is the method of Godard’s
Comment ga va: not being content to enquire if‘things are OK’ or if
‘things are not OK’ between two photos, but ‘how are things’
[comment ga va] for each one and for the two together. This was the
problem with which Volume 1 ended: tearing a real iamge from
clichés,
   On the one hand, the image constantly sinks to the state of
cliché: because it is introduced into sensory-motor linkages,
because it itself organizes or induces these linkages, because we
never perceive everything that is in the image, because it is made
for that purpose (so that we do not perceive everything, so that
the cliché hides the image from us . . .). Civilization of the image?
In fact, it is a civilization of the cliché where all the powers have an
interest in hiding images from us, not necessarily in hiding the
same thing from us, but in hiding something in the image. On the
other hand, at the same time, the image constantly attempts to
break through the cliché, to get out of the cliché. There is no
knowing how far a real image may lead: the importance of
becoming visionary or seer. A change of conscience or of heart is
not enough (although there is some of this, as in the heroine’s
heart in Europe 51, but, if there were nothing more, everything
would quickly return to the state of cliché, other clichés would
simply have been added on). Sometimes it is necessary to restore
the lost parts, to rediscover everything that cannot be seen in the
image, everything that has been removed to make it ‘interesting’.
But sometimes, on the contrary, it is necessary to make holes, to
introduce voids and white spaces, to rarify the image, by
suppressing many things that have been added to make us helieve
that we were seeing everything. It is necessary to make a division
or make emptiness in order to find the whole again.
   What is difficult is to know in what respect an optical and sound
image is not itself, a cliché, at best a photo. We are not thinking
simply of the way in which these images provide more cliché as
soon as they are repeated by authors who use them as formulas.
But is it not the case that the creators themselves sometimes have
the idea that the new image has to stand up against the cliché on
its own ground, make a higher bid than the postcard, add to it and
parody it, as a better way of getting over the problem (RobbeGrillet, Daniel Schmid)? The creators invent obsessive framings,
empty or disconnected spaces, even still lifes: in a certain sense

22                                                         Cinema 2
they stop movement and rediscover the power of the fixed shot,
but is this not to resuscitate the cliché that they aim to challenge?
Enough, for victory, to parody the cliché, not to make holes in it
and empty it. It is not enough to disturb the sensory-motor
connections. It is necessary to combine the optical-sound image
with the enormous forces that are not those of a simply
intellectual consciousness, nor of the social one, but of a pro­
found, vital intution.S9
   Pure optical and sound images, the fixed shot and the
montage-cut, do define and imply a beyond of movement. But
they do not strictly stop it, neither in the characters nor even in
the camera. They mean that movement should hot be perceived
in a sensory-motor image, but grasped and thought in another
type of image. The movement-image has not disappeared, but
now exists only as the first dimension of an image that never stops
growing in dimensions. We are not talking about dimensions of
space, since the image may be flat, without depth, and through
this very fact assumes all the more dimensions or powers which go
beyond space. Three of these growing powers can be briefly
summarized. First, while the movement-image and its sensorymotor signs were in a relationship only with an indirect image of
time (dependent on montage), the pure optical and sound image,
its opsigns and sonsigns, are directly connected to a time-image
which has subordinated movement. It is this reversal which
means that time is no longer the measure of movement but
movement is the perspective of time: it constitutes a whole cinema
of time, with a new conception and new forms of montage
(Welles, Resnais). In the second place, at the same time as the eye
takes up a clairvoyant function, the sound as well as visual
elements of the image enter into internal relations which means
that the whole image has to be ‘read’, no less than seen, readable
as well as visible. For the eye of the seer as of the soothsayer, it is
the ‘literalness’ of the perceptible world which constitutes it like a
book. Here again all reference of the image of description to an
object assumed to be independent does not disappear, but is now
subordinated to the internal elements and relations which tend to
 replace the object and to delete it where it does appear,
continually displacing it. Godard’s formula, ‘it isn’t blood, it’s
some red’, stops being only pictural and takes on a sense specific
 to the cinema. The cinema is going to become an analytic of the
 image, implying a new conception of cutting, a whole ‘pedagogy’
which will operate in different ways; for instance, in Ozu’s work,

Beyond the movement-image                                          23
in Rossellini’s late period, in Godard’s middle period, or in the
Straubs. Finally, the fixity of the camera does not represent the
only alternative to movement. Even when it is mobile, the camera
is no longer content sometimes to follow the characters’ move­
ment, sometimes itself to undertake movements of which they are
merely the object, but in every case it subordinates description of
a space to the functions of thought. This is not the simple
distinction between the subjective and the objective, the real and
the imaginary, it is on the contrary their indiscernibility which will
endow the camera with a rich array of functions, and entail a new
conception of the frame and reframings. Hitchcock’s premo­
nition will come true: a camera-consciousness which would no
longer be defined by the movements it is able to follow or make,
but by the mental connecdons it is able to enter into. And it
becomes questioning, responding, objecting, provoking,
theorematizing, hypothesizing, experimenting, in accordance
with the open list of logical conjunctions (‘or’, ‘therefore’, ‘if’,
‘because’, ‘actually’, ‘although . . .’), or in accordance with the
functions of thought in a cinéma-vérité, which, as Rouch says,
means rather truth of cinema [vérité du cinéma].
   This is the triple reversal which defines a beyond of movement.
The image had to free itself from sensory-motor links; it had to
stop being action-image in order to become a pure optical, sound
(and tactile) image. But the latter was not enough: it had to enter
into relations with yet other forces, so that it could itself escape
from a world of clichés. It had to open up to powerful and direct
revelations, those of the time-image, of the readable image and
the thinking image. It is in this way that opsigns and sonsigns
refer back to ‘chronosigns’, ‘lectosigns’ and ‘noosigns’.4"
   Antonioni, considering the evolution of neo-realism in relation
to Outcry, said that he was tending to do without a bicycle - De
Sica’s bicycle, naturally. Bicycle-less neo-realism replaces the last
quest involving movement (the trip) with a specific weight of time
operating inside characters and excavating them from within (the
chronicle).'11 Antonioni’s art is like the intertwining of conse­
quences, of temporal sequences and effects which flow from
events out-of-field. Already in Story of a Love Affair the investiga­
tion has the result, of itself, of provoking the outcome of a first
love affair, and the effect of making two oaths of m urder ring out
in the future and in the past. It is a whole world of chronosigns,
which would be enough to cast doubt on the false evidence
according to which the cinematographic image is necessarily in

24                                                        Cinema 2
the present. If we are sick with Eros, Antonioni said, it is because
Eros is himself sick; and he is sick not just because he is old and
worn out in his content, but because he is caught in the pure form
of a time which is torn between an already determined past and a
dead-end future. For Antonioni, there is no other sickness than
the chronic. Chronos is sickness itself. This is why chronosigns are
inseparable from lectosigns, which force us to read so many
symptoms in the image, that is, to treat the optica] and sound
image like something that is also readable. Not only the optical
and the sound, but the present and the past, and the here and the
elsewhere, constitute internal elements and relations which must
be deciphered, and can be understood only in a progression
analogous to that of a reading: from Story of a Love Affair,
indeterminate spaces are given a scale only later on, in which
Burch calls a ‘continuity grasped through discrepancy’ [raccord à
appréhension décalée], doser to a reading than to a perception.42
And later, Antonioni the colourist would be able to treat
variations of colours as symptoms, and monochrome as the
chronic sign which wins a world, thanks to a whole play of
deliberate modifications. But Story of a Love Affair already exhibits
a ‘camera autonomy’ when it stops following the movement of the
characters or directing its own movement at them, to carry out
constant reframings as functions of thought, noosigns expressing
the logical conjunctions of sequel, consequence, or even inten­
tion.

2     Recapitulation of images and
      signs

                                  1
It is necessary to carry out a recapitulation of the images and signs
in the cinema at this point. This is not merely a pause between the
movement-image and another kind of image, but an opportunity
to deal with the most pressing problem, that of the relations
between cinema and language. In fact, the possibility of a
semiology of the cinema seems to be dependent on these
reladons. Christian Metz has taken a number of precautions on
this point. Instead of asking ‘In what way is the cinema a language
(the famous universal language of humanity)?’, he poses the
question ‘Under what conditions should cinema be considered as
a language?’ And his reply is a double one, since it points first to a
fact, and then to an approximation. The historical fact is that
cinema was constituted as such by becoming narrative, by
presenting a story, and by rejecting its other possible directions.
The approximation which follows is that, from that point, the
sequences of images and even each image, a single shot, are
assimilated to propositions or rather oral utterances: the shot will
be considered as the smallest narrative utterance. Metz himself
underlines the hypothetical character of this assimilation. But it
could be said that he takes more precautions only to allow himself
a decisive recklessness. He posed a very rigorous question of right
{quid, juris?), and he replies with a fact and an evaluation.
Substituting an utterance for the image, he can and must apply to
it certain determinations which do not belong exclusively to the
language system \langue], but condition the utterances of a
language [langage], even if this language is not verbal and
operates independently of a language system. The principle
according to which linguistics is only a part of semiology is thus
realized in the definition of languages without a language system
(semes), which includes the cinema as well as the languages of
gestures, clothing or music. There is therefore no reason to look
for features in cinema that only belong to a language system, like
double articulation. On the other hand, language features which
necessarily apply to utterances will be found in the cinema, as

26                                                        Cinema 2
rules of use, in the language system and outside of it: the syntagm
(conjunction of present relative units) and the paradigm (disjunc­
tion of present units with comparable absent units). The semi­
ology of cinema will be the discipline that applies linguistic
models, especially syntagmatic ones, to images as constituting one
of their principal ‘codes’. We are moving in a strange circle here,
because syntagmatics assumes that the image can in fact be
assimilated to an utterance, but it is also what makes the image by
right assimilable to the utterance. It is a typically Kantian vicious
circle: syntagmatics applies because the image is an utterance, but
the image is an utterance because it is subject to syntagmatics. The
double of utterances and ‘grand syntagmatics’ has been substi­
tuted for that of images and signs, to the point where the very
notion of sign tends to disappear from this semiology. It
obviously disappears, clearly, to the benefit of the signifier. The
film appears as a text, with a distinction comparable to that made
by Julia Kristeva, between a ‘phenotext’ of utterances which
actually appear and a ‘genotext’ of structuring, constitutive or
productive syntagms and paradigms.1
   The first difficulty concerns narration: this is not an evident
[apparent] given in cinematographic images in general, even ones
which are historically established. There can certainly be no
quarrel with the passages in which Metz analyses the historical
fact of the American model which was constituted as cinema of
narration.2 And he recognizes that this narration itself indirectly
presupposes montage: the fact is that there are many linguistic
codes that interfere with the narrative code or the syntagmatics
(not only montages, but punctuations, audio-visual connections,
camera movements . . .). Similarly, Christian Metz has no insur­
mountable difficulty in accounting for the deliberate disturb­
ances of narration in modern cinema: it is enough to point to
changes of structure in the syntagmatics.’ The difficulty is
therefore elsewhere: it is that, for Metz, narration refers to one or
several codes as underlying linguistic determinants from which it
flows into the image in the shape of an evident given. On the
contrary, it seems to us that narration is only a consequence of the
visible [apparent] images themselves and their direct combinations
—it is never a given. So-called classical narration derives directly
from the organic composition of movement-images [montage], or
from their specification as perception-images, affection-images
and action-images, according to the laws of a sensory-motor
schema. We shall see that the modern forms of narration derive

Recapitulation of images and signs                               27
from the compositions and types of the time-image: even
‘readability’. Narration is never an evident [apparent] given of
images, or the effect of a structure which underlies them; it is a
consequence of the visible [apparent] images themselves, of the
perceptible images in themselves, as they are initially defined for
themselves.
   The root of the difficulty is the assimilation of the cinematogra­
phic image to an utterance. From that point on, this narrative
utterance necessarily operates through resemblance or analogy,
and, in as much as it proceeds through signs, these are ‘analogical
signs’. Semiology thus needs to have a double transformation: on
the one hand the reduction of the image to an analogical sign
belonging to an utterance; on the other hand, the codification of
these signs in order to discover the (non-analogical) linguistic
structure underlying these utterances. Everything will take place
between the utterance by analogy, and the ‘digital’ or digitalized
structure of the utterance.4
   But at the very point that the image is replaced by an utterance,
the image is given a false appearance, and its most authentically
visible characteristic, movement, is taken away from it.3 For the
 movement-image is not analogical in the sense of resemblance: it
does not resemble an object that it would represent. This is what
 Bergson showed from the first chapter of Matter and.Memory: if
 movement is taken from the moving body, there is no longer any
 distinction between image and object, because the distinction is
valid only through immobilization of the object. The movement-
 image is the object; the thing itself caught in movement as
 continuous function. The movement-image is the modulation of
 the object itself. We encounter ‘analogical’ again here, but in a
 sense which now has nothing to do with resemblance, and which
 indicates modulation, as in so-called analogical machines. It may
 be objected that modulation in turn refers on the one hand to
 resemblance, even if only to evaluate degrees in a continuum, and
 on the other hand to a code which is able to ‘digitalize’ analogy.
 But, here again, this is true only if movement is immobilized. The
 similar and the digital, resemblance and code, at least have in
 common the fact that they are moulds, one by perceptible form,
 the other by intelligible structure: that is why they can so easily
 have links with each other.6 But modulation is completely
 different; it is a putting into variation of the mould, a trans­
 formation of the mould at each moment of the operation. If it
 refers to one or several codes, it is by grafts, code-grafts that

28                                                           Cinema 2
multiply its power (as in the electronic image). By themselves,
resemblances and codifications are poor methods; not a great
deal can be done with codes, even when they are multiplied, as
semiology endeavours to do. It is modulation that nourishes the
two moulds and makes them into subordinate means, even if this
involves drawing a new power from them. For modulation is the
operation of the Real, in so far as it constitutes and never stops
reconstituting the identity of image and object.7
    In this respect, Pasolini’s highly complex thesis is in danger of
being misunderstood. Umberto Eco reproached him for his
‘semiological naïveté’. This incensed Pasolini. It is the fate of the
trick to appear too naive to those who are naive but over-clever.
Pasolini seems to want to go still further than the semiologists: he
wants cinema to be a. language system, to be provided with a
double articulation (the shot, equivalent to the moneme, but also
the objects appearing in the frame, ‘cinemes’ equivalent to
phonemes). It is as if he wants to return to the theme of a
universal language system. Except that he adds: it is the language
system . . . of reality. ‘Descriptive science of reality’, this is the
misunderstood nature of semiotics, beyond ‘existing languages’,
verbal or otherwise. Does he not mean that the movement-image
(the shot) consists of a first articulation in relation to a change or
becoming which the movement expresses, but also a second
articulation in relation to the objects between which it is estab­
lished, which have become at the same time integral parts of the
image (cinemes)? It would, therefore, be pointless to object to
Pasolini that the object is only a referent, and the image a portion
of the signified: the objects of reality have become units of the
image, at the same time as the movement-image has become a
reality which ‘speaks’ through its objects.8 The cinema, in this
sense, has constantly achieved a language of objects, in very
varied ways; in Kazan the object is behavioural function; in
Resnais it is mental function; in Ozu formal function or still life;
in Dovzhenko first, then in Paradjanov, material function,
ponderous matter roused by the spirit (SayatNova is definitely the
masterpiece of a material language of object).
    In fact, this language system of reality is not at all a language. It
is the system of the movement-image, which, as we saw in Volume
 1, was defined on vertical and horizontal axes which have nothing
to do with paradigm and syntagm, but constitute two ‘processes’.
On the one hand, the movement-image expresses a whole which
changes, and becomes established between objects: this is a

Recapitulation of images and signs                                29
process of differentiation. The movement-image (the shot) thus
has two sides, depending on the whole that it expresses and
depending on the objects between which it passes. The whole
constantly divides depending on the objects, and constantly
combines the objects into a whole [tout]: ‘everything’ [tout]
changes from one to the other. On the other hand, the move­
ment-image includes intervals: if it is referred to an interval,
distinct kinds of image appear, with signs through which they are
made up, each in itself and all of them together (thus the
percepdon-image is at one end of the interval, the action-image at
the other end and the affection-image in the interval itself). This
is a process of specification. These components of the movementimage, from the dual point of view of specification and differen­
tiation, constitute a signaletic material which includes all kinds of
modulation features, sensory (visual and sound), kinetic, inten­
sive, affective, rhythmic, tonal, and even verbal (oral and written).
Eisenstein compared them first to ideograms, then, more pro­
foundly, to the internal monologue as proto-language or primi­
tive language system. But, even with its verbal elements, this is
neither a language system nor a language. It is a plastic mass, an
a-signifying and a-syntaxic material, a material not formed
linguistically even though it is not amorphous and is formed
semiotically, aesthetically and pragmatically.9 It is a condition,
anterior by right to what it conditions. It is not an enunciation,
and these are not utterances. It is an utterable. We mean that, when
language gets hold of this material (and it necessarily does so),
then it gives rise to utterances which come to dominate or even
replace the images and signs, and which refer in turn to pertinent
features of the language system, syntagms and paradigms,
completely different from those we started with. We therefore
have to define, not semiology,but ‘semiotics’, as the system of
images and signs independent of language in general. When we
recall that linguistics is only a part of semiotics, we no longer
mean, as for semiology, that there are languages without a
language system, but that the language system only exists in its
reaction to a non-language-material that it transforms. This is why
utterances and narrations are not a given of visible images, but a
consequence which flows from this reaction. Narration is
grounded in the image itself, but it is not given. As for the
question of knowing if there are specific and intrinsic cinemato­
graphic utterances — written in silent cinema, oral in talking
cinema —it is a completely different question, which has to do with

30                                                         Cinema 2
the specificity of these utterances, and with the conditions on
which they belong to the system of images and signs, in short, on
the reverse reaction.

                                  2
Peirce’s strength, when he invented semiotics, was to conceive of
signs on the basis of images and their combinations, not as a
function of determinants which were already lingusitic. This led
him to the most extraordinary classification of images and signs,
of which we offer only a brief summary. Peirce begins with the
image, from the phenomenon or from what appears. The image
seems to him to be of three kinds, no more: firstness (something
that only refers to itself, quality or power, pure possibility; for
instance, the red that we find identical to itself in the proposition
‘You have not put on your red dress’ or ‘You are in red’);
seçondness (something that refers to itself only through some­
thing else, existence, action-reaction, effort-resistance); thirdness
(something that refers to itself only by comparing one thing to
another, relation, the law, the necessary). It will be noted that the
three kinds of images are not simply ordinal —first, second, third
—but cardinal: there are two in the second, to the point where
there is a firstness in the secondness, and there are three in the
third. If the third marks the culmination, it is because it cannot be
made up with dyads, but also because combinations of triads on
their own or with the other modes can produce any multiplicity.
This said, the sign in Peirce apparently combines the three kinds
of image, but not in any kind of way: the sign is an image which
stands for another image (its object), through the relation of a
third image which constitutes ‘its interprétant’, this in turn being
a sign, and so on to infinity. Hence Peirce, by combining the three
 modes of the image and the three aspects of the sign, produces
 nine sign elements, and ten corresponding signs (because all the
 combinations of elements are not logically possible).1" If we ask
 what the function of the sign is in relation to the image, it seems to
 be a cognitive one: not that the sign makes it object known; on the
 contrary, it presupposes knowledge of the object in another sign,
 but adds new elements of knowledge to it as a function of the
 interprétant. It is like two processes to infinity. O r rather, what
 amounts to the same thing, the sign’s function must be said to

Recapitulation of images and signs                                31
‘make relations efficient’: not that relations and laws lack actuality
qua images, but they still lack that efficiency which makes them act
‘when necessary’, and that only knowledge gives them ." But, on
this basis, Peirce can sometimes find himself as much a linguist as
the semiologists. For, if the sign elements still imply no privilege
for language, this is no longer the case with the sign, and linguistic
signs are perhaps the only ones to constitute a pure knowledge,
that is, to absorb and reabsorb the whole content of the image as
consciousness or appearance. They do not let any material that
cannot be reduced to an utterance survive, and hence reintro­
duce a subordination of semiotics to a language system. Peirce
would thus not have maintained his original position for very
long; he would have given up trying to make semiotics a
‘descriptive science of reality’ (logic).
   This is because, in his phenomenology, he claims the three
types of image as a fact, instead of deducing them. We saw in
Volume 1 that firstness, secondness and thirdness corresponded
to the affection-image, the action-image and the relation-image.
But all three are deduced from the movement-image as material,
as soon as it is related to the interval of movement. Now this
deduction is possible only if we first assume a perception-image.
O f course, perception is strictly identical to every image, in so far
 as every image acts and reacts on all the others, on all their sides
 and in all their parts. But, when they are related to the interval of
 movement which separates, within one image, a received and an
 executed movement, they now vary only in relation to this one
 image, which will be called ‘perceiving’ the movement received,
 on one of its sides, and ‘carrying out’ the movement executed, on
 another side or in other parts. A special perception-image is
 therefore formed, an image which no longer simply expresses
 movement, but the relation between movement and the interval
 of movement. If the movement-image is already perception, the
 perception-image will be perception of perception, and percep­
 tion will have two poles, depending on whether it is identified
 with movement or with its interval (variation of all the images in
 their relations with each other, or variation of all the images in
 relation to one of them). And perception will not constitute a first
 type of image in the movement-image without being extended
 into the other types, if there are any: perception of action, of
 affection, of relation, etc. The perception-image will therefore be
 like a degree zero in the deduction which is carried out as a
 function of the movement-image: there will be a ‘zeroness’ before

32                                                         Cinema 2
Peirce’s firstness. As for the question: are there types of image in
the movement-image other than the perception-image?, it is
resolved by the various aspects of the interval: the perceptionimage received movement on one side, but the affection-image is
what occupies the interval (firstness), the action-image what
executes the movement on the other side (secondness), and the
relation-image what reconstitutes the whole of the movement
with all the aspects of the interval (thirdness functioning as
closure of the deduction). Thus the movement-image gives rise to
a sensory-motor whole which grounds narration in the image.
   Between the perception-image and the others, there is no
intermediary, because perception extends by itself into the other
images. But, in the other cases, there is necessarily an inter­
mediary which indicates the extension as passage.12This is why, in
the end, we find ourselves faced with six types of perceptible
visible images that we see, not three: perception-image, affectionimage, impulse-image (intermediates between affection and action),
action-image, reflection-image (intermediate between action and
relation), relation-image. And since, on the one hand, deduction
constitutes a genesis of types, and, on the other, its degree zero,
the perception-image, gives the others a bipolar composition
appropriate to each case, we shall find ourselves with at least two
signs of composition, and at least one sign of genesis for each type
of image. We therefore take the term ‘sign’ in a completely
different way from Peirce: it is a particular image that refers to a
type of image, whether from the point of view of its bipolar
composition, or from the point of view of its genesis. It is clear
that all this involves the discussion in Volume 1: the reader may,
then, skip it, as long as he keeps in mind the recapitulation of
signs set out earlier, where we borrowed from Peirce a certain
number of terms whilst changing their meaning. Thus the signs
of composition for the perception-image are the dicisign and the
reume. The dicisign refers to a perception of perception, and
usually appears in cinema when the camera ‘sees’ a character who
is seeing; it implies a firm frame, and so constitutes a kind of solid
state of perception. But the reume refers to a fluid or liquid
perception which passes continuously through the frame. The
engramme, finally, is the genetic sign or the gaseous state of
perception, molecular perception, which the two others presup­
pose. The affection-image has the icon as sign of composition,
which can be of quality or of power; it is a quality or a power which
are only expressed (for example, a face) without being actualized.

Recapitulation of images and signs                               33
But it is the qualisign or the potisign which constitute the genetic
element because they construct quality or power in an any-spacewhatever, that is, in a space that does not yet appear as a real
setting. The impulse-image, intermediate between affection and
action, is composed of fetishes, fetishes of Good or Evil: these are
fragments torn from a derived setting, but which refer genetically
to the symptom of an originary world operating below the setting.
The action-image implies a real actualized setting which has
become sufficient, so that a global situation will provoke an action,
or on the contrary an action will disclose a part of the situation:
the two signs of composition, therefore, are the synsign and the
index. The internal link between situation and action, in any case,
constitutes the genetic element or the imprint. The reflectionimage, which goes from action to relation, is composed when
action and situation enter into indirect relations: the signs are
then figures, of attraction or inversion. And the genetic sign is
discursive, that is, a situation or an action of discourse, indepen­
dent of the question: is the discourse itself realized in a language?
Finally, the relation-image relates movement to the whole that it
expresses, and makes the whole vary according to the distribution
of movement: the two signs of composition will be the mark, or the
circumstance, through which two images are united, according to
a habit (‘natural’ relation), and the demark, the circumstance
through which an image finds itself torn from its natural relation
or series; the sign of genesis the symbol, the circumstance through
which we are made to compare two images, even arbitrarily
united (‘abstract’ relation).
   The movement-image is matter [matière] itself, as Bergson
showed. It is a matter that is not linguistically formed, although it
is semiotically, and constitutes the first dimension of semiotics. In
fact, the different kinds of image which are necessarily deduced
from the movement-image, the six kinds, are the elements that
make this matter into a signaletic material [matière signalétique].
And the signs themselves are the features of expression that
compose and combine these images, and constantly re-create
them, borne or carted along by matter in movement [la matière en
mouvement].
   A final problem then arises: why does Peirce think that
 everything ends with thirdness and the relation-image and that
 there is nothing beyond? This is undoubtedly true from the point
 of view of the movement-image: this is framed by the relations
 which relate it to the whole that it expresses, so much so that a

34                                                       Cinema 2
logic of relations seems to close the transformations of the
movement-image by determining the corresponding changes of
the whole. We have seen, in this sense, that a cinema like that of
Hitchcock, taking relation as its explicit object, completed the
circuit of the movement-image and brought to its logical perfec­
tion what could be called classical cinema. But we have en­
countered signs which, eating away at the action-image, also
brought their effect to bear above and below, on perception and
relation, and called into question the movement-image as a
whole: these are opsigns or sonsigns. The interval of movement
was no longer that in relation to which the movement-image was
specified as perception-image, at one end of the interval, as
action-image at the other end, and as affection-image between
the two, so as to constitute a sensory-motor whole. On the
contrary the sensory-motor link was broken, and the interval of
movement produced the appearance as such of an image other than
the movement-image. Sign and image thus reversed their relation,
because the sign no longer presupposed the movement-image as
material that it represented in its specified forms, but set about
presenting the other image whose material it was itself to specify,
and forms it was to constitute, from sign to sign. This was the
second dimension of pure, non-linguistic semiotics. There was to
arise a whole series of new signs, constitutive of a transparent
material, or of a time-image irreducible to the movement-image,
but not without a determinable relationship with it. We could no
longer consider Peirce’s thirdness as a limit of the system of
images and signs, because the opsign (or sonsign) set everything
off again, from the inside.

                                3
The movement-image has two sides, one in relation to objects
whose relative position it varies, the other in relation to a whole —
of which it expresses an absolute change. The positions are in
space, but the whole that changes is in time. If the movementimage is assimilated to the shot, we call framing the first facet of
the shot turned towards objects, and montage the other facet
turned towards the whole. Hence a first thesis: it is montage itself
which constitutes the whole, and thus gives us the image of time. It
is therefore the principal act of cinema. Time is necessarily an

Recapitulation of images and signs                               35
indirect representation, because it flows from the montage which
links one movement-image to another. This is why the connection
cannot be a simple juxtaposition: the whole is no more an
addidon than time is a succession of presents. As Eisenstein said
over and over again, montage must proceed by alterations,
conflicts, resolutions, and resonances, in short an activity of
selection and co-ordination, in order to give time its real
dimension, and the whole its consistency. This position of
principle implies that movement-image is itself in the present,
and nothing else. T hat the present is the sole direct time of the
cinematographic image seems to be almost a truism. Pasolini will
again rely on it to maintain a very classical notion of montage:
precisely because it selects and co-ordinates ‘significant
moments’, montage has the property o f‘making the present past’,
of transforming our unstable and uncertain present into ‘a clear,
stable and desirable past’, in short of achieving time. It is useless
for him to add that this is the operation of death, not a death that
is over and done with, but a death in life or a being for death
(‘death achieves a dazzling montage of our life’).13This black note
reinforces the classic, grandiose concept of the montage king:
time as indirect representation that flows from the synthesis of
images.
   But this thesis has another aspect, which seems to contradict the
first: the synthesis of movement-images must rely on character­
istics intrinsic to each of them. Each movement-image expresses
the whole that changes, as a function of the objects between which
movement is established. The shot must therefore already be a
potential montage, and the movement-image, a matrix or cell of
time. From this point of view, time depends on movement itself
and belongs to it: it may be defined, in the style of ancient
philosophers, as the num ber of movement. Montage will there­
fore be a relation of number, variable according to the intrinsic
nature of the movements considered in each image, in each shot.
A uniform movement in the shot appeals to a simple measure, but
varied and differential movements to a rhythm; intensive move­
ments proper (like light and heat) to a tonality, and the set of all
the potentialities of a shot, to a harmony. Hence Eisenstein’s
distinctions between a metrical, rhythmic, tonal and harmonic
montage. Eisenstein himself saw a certain opposition between the
synthetic point of view, according to which time flowed from the
montage, and the analytic point of view, according to which the
time set up was dependent on a movement-image.14According to

36                                                       Cinema 2
Pasolini, ‘the present is transformed into past’ by virtue of
montage, but this past ‘still appears as a present’ by virtue of the
nature of the image. Philosophy had already encountered a
similar opposition, in the notion of ‘num ber of movement’,
because number appeared sometimes like an independent in­
stance, sometimes like a simple dependence on what it measured.
Should we not, however, maintain both points of view, as the two
poles of an indirect representation of time: time depends on
movement, but through the intermediary of montage; it flows
from montage, but as if subordinate to movement? Classical
reflection turns on this kind of alternative, montage or shot.
   It is still necessary for movement to be normal: movement can
only subordinate time, and make it into a num ber that indirectly
measures it, if it fulfils conditions of normality. What we mean by
normality is the existence of centres: centres of the revolution of
movement itself, of equilibrium of forces, of gravity of moving
bodies, and of observation for a viewer able to recognize or
perceive the moving body, and to assign movement. A movement
that avoids centring, in whatever way, is as such abnormal,
aberrant. Antiquity came up against these aberrations of move­
ment, which even affected astronomy, and which became more
and more pronounced when one entered the sub-lunar world of
men (Aristotle). Now, aberrant movement calls into question the
status of time as indirect representation or number of movement,
because it evades the relationships of number. But, far from time
itself being shaken, it rather finds this the moment to surface
directly, to shake off its subordination in relation to movement
and to reverse this subordination. Conversely, then, a direct
presentation of time does not imply the halting of movement, but
rather the promotion of aberrant movement. What makes this
problem as much a cinematographic as a philosophical one is that
the movement-image seems to be in itself a profoundly aberrant
and abnormal movement. Epstein was perhaps the first to focus
theoretically on this point, which viewers in the cinema experi­
enced practically: not only speeded up, slowed down and
reversed sequences, but the non-distancing of the moving body
(‘a deserter was going flat out, and yet remained face to face with
us’), constant changes in scale and proportion (‘with no possible
common denominator’) and false continuities of movement (what
Eisenstein called ‘impossible continuity shots’).15
   More recently, Jean-Louis Schefer, in a book in which the
theory forms a kind of great poem, showed that the ordinary

Recapitulation of images and signs                                 37
cinema-viewer, the man without qualities, found his correlate in
the movement-image as extraordinary movement. The movement-image does not reproduce a world, but constitutes an
autonomous world, made up of breaks and disproportion,
deprived of all its centres, addressing itself as such to a viewer who
is in himself no longer centre of his own perception. The
percipiens and the percipi have lost their points of gravity. Schefer
draws the most rigorous consequence from this: the aberration of
movement specific to the cinematographic image sets time free
from any linkage; it carries out a direct presentation of time by
reversing the relationship of subordinadon that time maintains
with normal movement; ‘cinema is the sole experience where
dme is given to me as a perception’. Certainly Schefer points to a
primordial crime with an essential link to this condition of
cinema, just as Pasolini invoked a primordial death for the other
situation. It is a homage to psychoanalysis, which has only ever
given cinema one sole object, one single refrain, the so-called
primitive scene. But there is no other crime than time itself. What
aberrant movement reveals is time as everything, as ‘infinite
opening’, as anteriority over all normal movement defined by
motivity [motricité]: time has to be anterior to the controlled flow
of every action, there must be ‘a birth of the world that is not
completely restricted to the experience of our motivity’ and ‘the
most distant recollection of image must be separated from all
movement of bodies’.16 If normal movement subordinates the
time of which it gives us an indirect representation, aberrant
movement speaks up for an anteriority of time that it presents to
us directly, on the basis of the disproportion of scales, the
dissipation of centres and the false continuity of the images
themselves.
   What is in question is the obviousness on the basis of which the
cinematographic image is in the present, necessarily in the
present. If it is so, time can be represented only indirectly, on the
basis of a present movement-image and through the inter­
mediary of montage. But is this not the falsest obviousness, in at
least two respects? First, there is no present which is not haunted
by a past and a future, by a past which is not reducible to a former
present, by a future which does not consist of a present to come.
Simple succession affects the presents which pass, but each
present coexists with a past and a future without which it would
not itself pass on. It is characteristic of cinema to seize this past
and this future that coexist with the present image. To film what is

38                                                         Cinema 2
before and what is after . . . Perhaps it is necessary to make what is
before and after thé film pass inside it in order to get out of the
chain of presents. For example, the characters: Godard says that
it is necessary to know what they were before being placed in the
picture, and will be after. ‘That is what cinema is, the present
never exists there, except in bad films.’17 This is very difficult,
because it is not enough to eliminate fiction, in favour of a crude
reality which would lead us back all the more to presents which
pass. On the contrary, it is necessary to move towards a limit, to
make the limit of before the film and after it pass into the film and
to grasp in the character the limit that he himself steps over in
order to enter the film and leave it, to enter into the fiction as into
a present which is inseparable from its before and after (Rouch,
Perrault). We shall see that this is precisely the aim of cinéma-vérité
or of direct cinema: not to achieve a real as it would exist
independently of the image, but to achieve a before and an after
as they coexist with the image, as they are inseparable from the
image. This is what direct cinema must mean, to the point where
it is a component of all cinema: to achieve the direct presentation
of time.
    Not only is the image inseparable from a before and an after
which belong to it, which are not to be confused with the
preceding and subsequent images; but in addition it itself tips
over into a past and a future of which the present is now only an
extreme limit, which is never given. Take, for example, the depth
of field in Welles: when Kane is going to catch up with his friend
 the journalist for the break, it is in time that he moves, he occupies
a place in time rather than changing place in space. And when the
 investigator at the beginning of Mr Arkadin emerges into the great
 courtyard, he literally emerges from time rather than coming
 from another place. Take Visconti’s tracking shots: at the
 beginning of Sandra, when the heroine returns to the house
 where she was born, and stops to buy the black headscarf that she
 will cover her head with, and the cake that she will eat like magic
 food, she does not cover space, she sinks into time. And in a film a
 few minutes long, Appunti su un Fatto di Cronaca, a slow tracking
 shot follows the empty path of the raped and m urdered school­
 girl, and comes back to the fully present image to load it with a
 petrified perfect tense, as well as with an inescapable future
 perfect.1" In Resnais too it is time that we plunge into, not at the
 mercy of a psychological memory that would give us only an
 indirect representation, nor at the mercy of a recollection-image

Recapitulation of images and signs                                 39
that would refer us back to a former present, but following a
deeper memory, a memory of the world directly exploring time,
reaching in the past that which conceals itself from memory. How
feeble the flashback seems beside explorations of time as
powerful as this, such as the silent walk on the thick hotel carpet
which each time puts the image into the past in Last Year in
Marienbad. The tracking shots of Resnais and Visconti, and
Welles’s depth of field, carry out a temporalization of the image
or form a direct time-image, which realizes the principle: the
cinematographic image is in the present only in bad films. ‘Rather
than a physical movement, it is a question above all of a
displacement in time.’19 And undoubtedly there are many
possible ways of proceeding: it is, on the contrary, the crushing of
depth and the planitude of the image, which, in Dreyer and other
authors, will directly open the image on to time as fourth
dimension. This is, as we shall see, because there are varieties of
the time-image just as there were types of the movement-image.
But the direct time-image always gives us access to that Proustian
dimension where people and things occupy a place in time which
is incommensurable with the one they have in space. Proust
indeed speaks in terms of cinema, tíme mounting its magic
lantern on bodies and making the shots coexist in depth.2'1It is this
build-up, this emancipation of time, which ensures the rule of
impossible continuity and aberrant movement. The postulate of
‘the image in the present’ is one of the most destructive for any
understanding of cinema.
   But were these characteristics not clear in the cinema at an early
stage (Eisenstein, Epstein)? Is Schefer’s theme not valid for the
whole of the cinema? How are we to delineate a modern cinema
which would be distinct from ‘classical’ cinema or from the
indirect representation of time? We might once more rely on an
analogy in thought: if it is true that aberrations of movement were
recognized at an early stage, they were in some sense corrected,
 normalized, ‘elevated’, and brought into line with laws which
 saved movement, extensive movement of the world or intensive
 movement of the soul, and which maintained the subordination
 of time. In fact we will have to wait for Kant to carry out the great
 reversal: aberrant movement became the most everyday kind,
 everydayness itself, and it is no longer time that depends on
 movement, but the opposite . . . A similar story appears in
 cinema. For a long time aberrations of movement were
 recognized, but warded off. The intervals of movement first

40                                                          Cinema 2
called its communication into question and introduced a gap or
disproportion between a received movement and an executed
one. Even so, related to such an interval, the movement-image
finds in it the principle of its differentiation into the perceptionimage (received movement) and the action-image (executed
movement). What was aberration in relation to the movementimage cases to be so in relation to these two images: the interval
itself now plays the role of centre, and the sensory-motor schema
restores the lost proportion, re-establishes it in a new mode,
between perception and action. The sensory-motor schema
moves forward by selection and co-ordination. Perception is
organized in obstacles and distances to be crossed, while action
invents the means to cross and surm ount them, in a space which
sometimes constitutes an ‘encompasser’, sometimes a ‘line of the
universe’: movement is saved by becoming relative. And this
status, of course, does not exhaust the movement-image. As soon
as it stops being related to an interval as sensory-motor centre,
movement finds its absolute quality again, and every image reacts
with every other one, on all their sides and in all their parts. This is
the regime of universal variation, which goes beyond the human
limits of the sensory-motor schema towards a non-human world
where movement equals matter, or else in the direction of a
super-human world which speaks for a new spirit. It is here that
the movement-image attains the sublime, like the absolute
condition of movement, whether in the material sublime of
Vertov, in the mathematical sublime of Gance, or in the dynamic
sublime of Murnau or Lang. But in any event the movementimage remains primary, and gives rise only indirectly to a
representation of time, through the intermediary of montage as
organic composition of relative movement, or supra-organic
recomposition of absolute movement. Even Vertov, when he
carries perception over into matter, and action into universal
interaction, peopling the universe with micro-intervals, points to
a ‘negative of time’ as the ultimate product of the movementimage through montage.2'
    Now, from its first appearances, something different happens
 in what is called modern cinema: not something more beautiful,
 more profound, or more true, but something different. What has
 happened is that the sensory-motor schema is no longer in
 operation, but at the same time it is not overtaken or overcome. It
 is shattered from the inside. That is, perceptions and actions
 ceased to be linked together, and spaces are now neither

Recapitulation of images and signs                                 41
co-ordinated nor filled. Some characters, caught in certain pure
optical and sound situations, find themselves condemned to
wander about or go off on a trip. These are pure seers, who no
longer exist except in the interval of movement, and do not even
have the consolation of the sublime, which would connect them to
matter or would gain control of the spirit for them. They are
rather given over to something intolerable which is simply their
everydayness itself. It is here that the reversal is produced:
movement is no longer simply aberrant, aberration is now valid in
itself and designates time as its direct cause. ‘Time is out of joint’:
it is off the hinges assigned to it by behaviour in the world, but also
by movements of world. It is no longer time that depends on
movement; it is aberrant movement that depends on time. The
relation, sensory-motor situations indirect image of time is replaced
by a non-localizable relation, pure optical and sound situation-
 —» direct time-image. Opsigns and sonsigns are direct presentations
of time. False continuity shots are the non-localizable relation
itself: characters no longer jum p across them, they are swallowed
up in them. Where has Gertrud gone? Into the false continuity
shots . . .22 O f course they have always been there, in the cinema,
like aberrant movements. But what makes them take on a
specifically new value, to the point where Gertrud was not
understood at the time and still offends perception? We can
choose between emphasizing the continuity of cinema as a whole,
or emphasizing the difference between the classical and the
modern. It took the modern cinema to re-read the whole of
cinema as already made up of aberrant movements and false
continuity shots. The direct time-image is the phantom which has
always haunted the cinema, but it took modern cinema to give a
body to this phantom. This image is virtual, in opposition to the
actuality of the movement-image. But, if virtual is opposed to
actual, it is not opposed to real, far from it. Again, this time-image
will be said to presuppose montage, just as much as indirect
representation did. But montage has changed its meaning, it
 takes on a new function: instead of being concerned with
 movement-images from which it extracts an indirect image of
 time, it is concerned with the time-image, and extracts from it the
 relations of time on which aberrant movement must now depend.
To adopt a word of Lapoujade’s, montage has become ‘mon-
 trage’.23’
    What seems to be broken is the circle in which we were led from
 shot to montage and from montage to shot, one constituting the

42                                                          Cinema 2
movement-image, the other the indirect image of time. Despite
all its efforts (and especially those of Eisenstein), the classical
conception had difficulty in getting rid of the idea of a vertical
construction going right to the edge in both directions, where
montage worked on movement-images. It has often been pointed
out, in modern cinema, that the montage was already in the
image, or that the components of an image already implied
montage. There is no longer an alternative between montage and
shot (in Welles, Resnais, or Godard). Sometimes montage occurs
in the depth of the image, sometimes it becomes flat: it no longer
asks how images are linked, but ‘What does the image show?’24
This identity of montage with the image itself can appear only in
conditions of the direct time-image. In a text with important
implications Tarkovsky says that what is essential is the way time
flows in the shot, its tension or rarefaction, ‘the pressure of time in
the shot’. He appears to subscribe to the classical alternative, shot
or montage, and to opt strongly for the shot (‘the cinematographic
figure only exists inside the shot’). But this is only a superficial
appearance, because the force or pressure of time goes outside
the limits of the shot, and montage itself works and lives in time.
What Tarkovsky denies is that cinema is like a language working
with units, even if these are relative and of different orders:
montage is not a unit of a higher order which exercises power
over unit-shots and which would thereby endow movementimages with time as a new quality.2’ The movement-image can be
perfect, but it remains amorphous, indifferent and static if it is
not already deeply affected by injections of time which put
montage into it, and alter movement. ‘The time in a shot must
flow independently and, so to speak, as its own boss’: it is only on
this condition that the shot goes beyond the movement-image,
and montage goes beyond indirect representation of time, to both
share in a direct time-image, the one determining the form or
rather force of time in the image, the other the relations of time or
of forces in the succession of images (relations that are no more
reducible to succession, than the image is to movement). T ar­
kovsky calls his text ‘On the cinematographic figure’, because he
calls figure that which expresses the ‘typical’, but expresses it in a
pure singularity, something unique. This is the sign, it is the very
function of the sign. But, as long as signs find their material in the
movement-image, as long as they form the singular expressional
features, from a material in movement, they are in danger of
evoking another generality which would lead to their being

Recapitulation of images and signs                                  43
confused with a language. The representation of time can be
extracted from this only by association and generalization, or as
concept (hence Eisenstein’s bringing together of montage and
concept). Such is the ambiguity of the sensory-motor schema,
agent of abstraction. It is only when the sign opens directly on to
time, when time provides the signaletic material itself, that the
type, which has become temporal, coincides with the feature of
singularity separated from its motor associations. It is here that
Tarkovsky’s wish comes true: that ‘the cinematographer succeeds
in fixing time in its indices [in its signs] perceptible by the senses’.
And, in a sense, cinema had always done this; but, in another
sense, it could only realize that it had in the course of its evolution,
thanks to a crisis of the movement-image. To use a formula of
Nietzsche’s, it is never at the beginning that something new, a new
art, is able to reveal its essence; what it was from the outset it can
reveal only after a detour in its evolution.

3     From Recollection to Dreams:
      third commentary on Bergson

                                 i
Bergson distinguishes two kinds of ‘recognition’. Automatic or
habitual recognition (the cow recognizes grass, I recognize my
friend Peter) works by extension: perception extends itself into
the usual movements; the movements extend perception so as to
draw on its useful effects. It is a sensory-motor recognition that
comes about above all through movements: motor mechanisms
which the sight of the object is enough to trigger are constituted
and accumulated. In a certain sense we constantly distance
ourselves from the first object: we pass from one object to another
one, according to a movement that is horizontal or of associations
of images, but remaining on one and the same plane (the cow moves
from one clump of grass to another, and, with my friend Peter, I
move from one subject of conversation to another). The second
mode of recognition, attentive recognition, is very different. Here, I
abandon the extending of my perception, I cannot extend it. My
movements —which are more subtle and of another kind —revert
to the object, return to the object, so as to emphasize certain
contours and take ‘a few characteristic features’ from it. And we
begin all over again when we want to identify different features
and contours, but each time we have to start from scratch. In this
case, instead of an addition of distinct objects on the same plane,
we see the object remaining the same, but passing through different
planes.' In the first case, we had, we perceived, a sensory-motor
image from the thing. In the other case, we constitute a pure
optical (and sound) image of the thing, we make a description.
   How are the two kinds of images distinguished? It would seem
first of all that the sensory-motor image is richer, because it is the
thing itself, at least the thing as it extends into the movements by
which we make use of it. Whilst the pure optical image seems
necessarily poorer and more rarefied: as Robbe-Grillet says, it is
not the thing, but a ‘description’ which tends to replace the thing,
which ‘erases’ the concrete object, which selects only certain
 features of it, even if this means making way for different
descriptions which will pick out different lines or features, which

From recollection to dreams                                          45
are always provisional, always in question, displaced or replaced.
It may be objected that a cinematographic image — even a
sensory-motor one —is necessarily a description. But at this point
we must contrast two kinds of descriptions: one is organic (as
when we say that a chair is made to sit on, or grass to be eaten),
while the other is physical-geometrical, inorganic. We have
already noted in Rossellini the extent to which the factory seen by
the bourgeoise woman, in Europe 51, was a visual and sound
‘abstract’, barely ‘concretely denoted’, reduced to a few features.
And in Les carabiniers Godard makes each shot a description
which replaces the object, and which will make way for a different
description, so that, instead of organically describing an object,
we are shown pure descriptions which are unmade at the same
time as they are outlined.2 If the new cinema, like the new novel, is
of considerable philosophical and logical importance, it is first of
all because of the theory of descriptions which it implies —of
which Robbe-Grillet was the pioneer.3
   At this point everything is reversed. The sensory-motor image
effectively retains from the thing only what interests us, or what
extends into the reaction of a character. Its richness is thus
superficial and comes from the fact that it associates with the
thing many different things that resemble it on the same plane, in
so far as they provoke all the same movements: it is grass in
general that interests the herbivore. It is in this sense that the
sensory-motor schema is an agent of abstraction. Conversely, the
pure optical image may be only a description, and concern a
character who no longer knows how or is no longer able to react to
the situation; the restraint of this image, the thinness of what it
retains, line or simple point, ‘slight fragment without impor­
tance’, bring the thing each time to an essential singularity, and
describe the inexhaustible, endlessly referring to other descrip­
tions. It is, then, the optical image which is really rich, or ‘typical’.
   At least it would be if we knew what use it was. It was easy to
say that the sensory-motor image was useful because it linked a
perception-image to an action-image; it already modelled the
first on the second and extended the one into the other. But the
pure optical image is a completely different matter, not only
because it is a different type of image, a different type of
perception, but also because its mode of linkage is not the same.
There is a simple, provisional answer and it is the one Bergson
gives initially: the optical (and sound) image in attentive recogni­
tion does not extend into movement, but enters into relation
with

46                                                         Cinema 2
a ‘recollection-image’ that it calls up. Perhaps we should also
imagine other possible answers, more or less related, more or less
distinct: what would enter into relation would be the real and the
imaginary, the physical and the mental, the objective and the
subjective, description and narration, the actual and the virtual. . .
The essential point, in any event, is that the two related terms
differ in nature, and yet ‘run after each other’, refer to each
other, reflect each other, without it being possible to say which is
first, and tend ultimately to become confused by slipping into the
same point of indiscernibility. A zone of recollections, dreams, or
thoughts corresponds to a particular aspect of the thing: each
time it is a plane or a circuit, so that the thing passes through an
infinite number of planes or circuits which correspond to its own
‘layers’ or its aspects. A different, virtual mental image would
correspond to a different description, and vice versa: a different
circuit. The heroine of Europe 51 sees certain features of the
factory, and thinks she is seeing convicts: ‘I thought I saw convicts
.. .’ (it should be noted that she does not evoke a simple
recollection, the factory does not remind her of a prison, the
heroine calls up a mental vision, almost an hallucination). She
could have seized on other features, and had a different vision:
the workers’ entry, the call of the siren, I thought I saw
condemned survivors, running towards dark shelters . . .
    How can we say that it is the same object (the factory) which
passes through different circuits, because each time description
has obliterated the object, at the same time as the mental image
has created a different one? Each circuit obliterates and creates
an object. But it is precisely in this ‘double movement of creation
and erasure’ that successive planes and independent circuits,
cancelling each other out, contradicting each other, joining up
with each other, forking, will simultaneously constitute the layers
of one and the same physical reality, and the levels of one and the
same mental reality, memory or spirit. As Bergson says, ‘it will be
seen that the progress of attention results in creating anew, not
only the object perceived, but also the ever-widening systems with
which it may be bound up; so that in the measure in which the
 circles, B, C, D, represent a higher expansion of memory, their
 reflection attains in B’, C’, D’ deeper strata of reality’/
    Thus, in Rossellini, the island of Stromboli passes through ever
   eeper descriptions, the approaches, the fishing, the storm, the
 e- P ^ n . at the same time as the foreign woman climbs higher
 an ig er on the island, until description is engulfed in depth

From recollection to dreams                                           47
and the spirit is shattered by a tension which is too strong. From
the slopes of the unleashed volcano, the village is seen far below,
sparkling above the black waves, while the spirit whispers: ‘I am
finished, I am afraid, what mystery, what beauty, my God . . .’
There are no longer sensory-motor images with their extensions,
but much more complex circular links between pure optical and
sound images on the one hand, and on the other hand images
from time and thought, on planes which all coexist by right,
constituting the soul and body of the island.

                                   2
The purely optical and sound situation (description) is an actual
image, but one which, instead of extending into movement, links
up with a virtual image and forms a circuit with it. The problem is
to know more precisely what is capable of playing the role of
virtual image. What Bergson calls ‘recollection-image’ seems at
first sight to have the requisite qualities. O f course, recollectionimages already intervene in automadc recognition; they insert
themselves between stimulation and response, and contribute to
the better adjustment to the motor mechanism by reinforcing it
with a psychological causality. But, in this sense, they only
intervene accidentally and in a secondary way in automatic
recognidon, whilst they are essendal to attenuve recognidon: this
latter comes about through them. In other words, with recollection-images, a whole new sense of subjectivity appears. We have
seen that subjecuvity already emerged in the movement-image; it
appears as soon as there is a gap between a received and an
executed movement, an action and a reaction, a stimulation and a
response, a percepdon-image and an acdon-image. And if
affection itself is also a dimension of this first subjectivity, it is
because it belongs to the gap, it constitutes its ‘insides’, it in a sense
occupies it, but without filling or fulfilling it. Now, on the
contrary, the recollection-image comes to fill the gap and really
does fulfil it, in such a way that it leads us back individually to
perception, instead of extending this into generic movement. It
makes full use of the gap, it assumes it, because it lodges itself
there, but it is of a different nature. Subjectivity, then, takes on a
new sense, which is no longer motor or material, but temporal
and spiritual: that which ‘is added’ to matter, not what distends it;
recollection-image, not movement-image.0

48                                                           Cinema 2
   The relation of the actual image to recollection-images can be
seen in the flashback. This is precisely a closed circuit which goes
from the present to the past, then leads us back to the present. Or
rather, as in Carné’s Daybreak, it is a multiplicity of circuits each of
which goes through a zone of recollections and returns to an even
deeper, ever more inexorable, state of the present situation.
Carné’s hero, at the end of each circuit, finds himself back in his
hotel room besieged by the police, each time closer to the fatal
outcome (the window-panes smashed, the bullet holes in the wall,
the succession of cigarettes . . .). But we know very well that the
flashback is a conventional, extrinsic device: it is generally
indicated by a dissolve-link, and the images that it introduces are
often superimposed or meshed. It is like a sign with the words:
‘watch out! recollection’. It can, therefore, indicate, by conven­
tion, a causality which is psychological, but still analogous to a
sensory-motor determinism, and, despite its circuits, only con­
firms the progression of a linear narration. The question of the
flashback is this: it has to be justified from elsewhere, just as
recollection-images must be given the internal mark of the past
from elsewhere. The circumstances must be such that the story
cannot be told in the present. It is therefore necessary for
something else to justify or impose the flashback, and to mark or
authenticate the recollection-image. Carné’s response here is very
clear: it is destiny which goes beyond determinism and causality;
it is destiny that sketches out a super-linearity; it is destiny that
both justifies flashback and provides recollection-images with a
mark of the past. Thus, in Daybreak, the sound of the obsessive
refrain comes from the depths of time to justify the flashback, and
the ‘anger’ carries the tragic hero away to the depths of time to
deliver him to the past.6 But if the flashback and the recollectionimage thus find their foundation in destiny, it is only in a relative
or conditional way. For destiny can be exhibited directly in other
ways, and can affirm a pure power of time which overflows all
memory, an already-past which exceeds all recollections: we are
not just thinking of expressionist figures of blind men or tramps
with which Carné’s work is strewn, but of the immobilizings and
petrifications in Visiteurs du Soir, or the use of mime in LesEnfants
du Paradis, and more generally of light, which Carné uses in the
French style — luminous grey which passes through every
atmospheric nuance and constitutes a great circuit of the sun and
moon.
   Mankiewicz is undoubtedly the greatest flashback author. But

From recollection to dreams                                             49
the use he makes of it is so special that it may be contrasted with
that of Carné, as the two extreme poles of the recollection-image.
There is no longer any question of an explanation, a causality or a
linearity which ought to go beyond themselves in destiny. On the
contrary it is a matter of an inexplicable secret, a fragmentation of
all linearity, perpetual forks like so many breaks in causality.
Time in Mankiewicz is exacdy as Borges describes it in ‘The
Garden of Forking Paths’:'* it is not space but time which forks,
‘web of time which approaches, forks, is cut off or unacknow­
ledged for centuries, embracing every possibility’. It is here that
the flashback finds its justification: at each point where time forks.
The multiplicity of circuits thus finds a new meaning. It is not
simply several people each having a flashback, it is the flashback
belonging to several people (three in The Barefoot Contessa, three
in A Letter to Three Wives, two in All About Eve). And it is not just the
circuits forking between themselves, it is each circuit forking
within itself, like a split hair. In the three circuits in A Letter to Three
Wives, each of the women wonders in her own way when and how
her marriage began to go adrift, to take a forking route. And even
when there is a single fork, like the taste for mud in a proud and
splendid creature (The Barefoot Contessa), its repetitions are not
accumulations, its manifestations refuse to be aligned, or to
reconstitute a destiny, but constantly split up any state of
equilibrium and each time impose a new ‘meander’, a new break
in causality, which itself forks from the previous one, in a
collection of non-linear relations." One of Mankiewicz’s most
beautiful forks is in Whispers in the City, where the doctor, who has
come to tell the father that his daughter is pregnant, finds himself
in the middle of talking to the daughter about love and asks to
marry her, in a dream-landscape. Two characters are eternal
enemies, in a universe of automata; but there is a world where one
of the two maltreats the other and forces a clown costume on him,
and a world where the other takes on the dress of inspector and
becomes master in turn, until the unleashed automata shuffle all
the possibilities, all worlds and all times (The Bloodhound). Mankie­
wicz’s characters never develop in a linear evolution: the stages
passed through by Eve, taking the place of the actress, stealing
her lover, seducing the girlfriend’s husband, blackmailing the
girlfriend, do not take part in a progression but each time
constitute a deviation which makes a circuit, allowing a secret to
exist in the whole which the new Eve at the end of the film will
inherit, point of departure for other forks.

50                                                            Cinema 2
   In effect, there is neither straight line nor circle which
completes itself. All About Eve9* is not exactly ‘all about Eve’, it is
rather ‘a bit’, as a character in the film says: ‘She will be able to tell
you a bit about this subject . . .’ And, in Suddenly Last Summer,
there is only one flashback, when the girl again encounters at the
end the horrible recollection which is eating away at her, because
the other flashbacks have been blocked, replaced by stories and
hypotheses, without, however, cancelling the corresponding
forks which allow an inexplicable secret to exist for ever. In fact,
the son’s homosexuality explains nothing. The mother’s jealousy
is a first fork, as soon as she is supplanted by the girl; the
homosexuality is a second, when the son uses the girl as he used
his mother, as baits for boys; but there is still one more, still
another circuit, which takes up the description of the carnivorous
flowers and the story of the horrendous fate of the little tortoises
which are devoured, when the flashback reveals, beneath the
son’s homosexuality, an orgiastic mystery, cannibalistic tastes of
which he ends up victim, hacked and dismembered by his young,
wretched lovers, to the sounds of a barbaric music of the slums.
And here again, at the end, it seems that everything starts up
again, and the mother ‘will devour’ the young doctor that she has
mistaken for her son. In Mankiewicz, the flashback always reveals
its raison d'être in these angled accounts which shatter causality
and, instead of dispersing the enigma, refer it back to other still
deeper ones. Chabrol will rediscover this power and use of the
flashback in Violette Nozière, when he wants to indicate the
heroine’s continual forks, the variety of her faces, the irreducible
diversity of the hypotheses (did she or did she not want to spare
her mother, etc?).10
   Time’s forks thus provide flashback with a necessity, and
recollection-images with an authenticity, a weight of past without
which they would remain conventional. But why, and how? The
answer is simple: the forking points are very often so impercep­
tible that they cannot be revealed until after their occurrence, to
an attentive memory. It is a story that can be told only in the past.
This was already the constant question for Fitzgerald, to whom
Mankiewicz is very close: what happened? How have we arrived
at this point?" This is what governs the three flashbacks of
women in A Letter to Three Wives and Harry’s recollections in The
Barefoot Contessa. It is perhaps the question of all questions.
   The theatrical character of Mankiewicz’s work has often been
pointed out, but there is also a ‘novelistic’ element (or more

From recollection to dreams                                        51
precisely ‘a short story’ element, for it is the short story that asks:
what happened?). What has not been sufficiently analysed,
however, is the relation between the two, their original fusion
which means that Mankiewicz re-created a complete cinemato­
graphic specificity. On one hand, the novelistic element, the story,
appears in the memory. The memory in fact, following a formula
of Janet’s, is story behaviour. In its very essence, memory is voice,
which speaks, talks to itself, or whispers, and recounts what
happened. Hence the voice-off which accompanies the flashback.
In Mankiewicz this spiritual role of memory often gives way to a
creature more or less connected with the beyond: the phantom in
Mrs Muir’s Adventure, the ghost in Whispers in the City, the automata
in Bloodhound. In A Letter to Three Wives, there is the fourth
girlfriend, the one that will never be seen, that is once barely
glimpsed, and who has made it known to the three others that she
is going off with one of their husbands (but which one?): it is her
voice-off which looms over the other three flashbacks. In any
event, the voice as memory frames the flashback. But, in another
sense, what the latter ‘shows’, and what the former reports, are
more voices: characters and décors which are of course meant to
be seen, but are in essence speaking and of sound. This is the
theatrical element: the dialogue between the characters who
appear, and sometimes even the appearance of the character
himself, produces a story {All About Eve). In one of the flashbacks
in A Letter to Three Wives there is the dinner scene where the
teacher-husband and the wife in advertising entertain the latter’s
female boss: all the movements of characters and camera are
determined by the mounting violence of their dialogue, and the
distribution of two opposed sound-sources, that of the radio
programme, and that of the classical music with which the teacher
challenges it. The essential point, then, is the intimacy of the
relation between the novelistic element in memory as story
behaviour, and the theatrical element of the dialogues, words and
sounds as conducts of the characters.
   Now this internal relation is determined in a very original way
in Mankiewicz. What is reported is always a skidding, a detour, a
fork. But, although the fork may in principle be discovered only
after the event, through flashback, there is one character who has
been able to foresee it, or grasp it at the time, whether he uses it
later for good or for evil. Mankiewicz is brilliant with these scenes.
It is not only Harry’s role in The Barefoot Contessa; it happens in
two important scenes in All About Eve. First, the actress’s

52                                                             Cinema 2
secretary-dresser has understood straight away Eve’s deceit­
fulness, her split personality: at the exact moment that Eve was
producing her false story, she heard everything from the next
room, out of frame, and comes into the frame to give Eve an
intense look and briefly show her doubt. And then, later, the
devilish theatre-critic will surprise another of Eve’s forks, when
she strives to seduce the actress’s lover. He hears, and perhaps
notices, through the half-open door, as between two fields. He
will know how to use this later, but he has understood at the time
(and it is at different moments that each of the characters
understands, thanks to a new fork). Now, in all these cases, we do
not leave memory. But instead of a constituted memory, as
function of the past which reports a story, we witness the birth of
memory, as function of the future which retains what happens in
order to make it the object to come of the other memory. This is
what Mankiewicz has very clearly understood: memory could
never evoke and report the past if it had not already been
constituted at the moment when the past was still present, hence
in an aim to come. It is in fact for this reason that it is behaviour: it
is in the present that we make a memory, in order to make use of it
in the future when the present will be past.12 It is this memory of
the present which makes the two elements communicate from the
inside, novelistic memory as it appears in the reporting story, and
the theatrical present as it appears in the reported dialogues. It is
this circulating third which gives the whole a totally cinematogra­
phic value. It is this role of spy, or of involuntary witness, which
gives Mankiewicz’s cinema its whole force: visual and auditory
birth of memory. Hence the way in which we find in him the two
distinct aspects of the out-of-field: an aside concerning the
character who surprises the fork, and a beyond concerning the
character who relates it to the past (sometimes the same character,
sometimes a different one).
    But if it is true that flashback and the recollection-image thus
find a reason for their existence in these forks of time, this reason
—as we have seen in the very different case of Carné —may act
directly, without going through flashback, outside any memory.
This is true in particular of the two great, theatrical, Shake­
spearean films, Julius Caesar and Cleopatra. It is true that the
historical character of these films already takes the place of
memory (and, in Cleopatra, the technique of frescoes which come
to life). It is still the case that, in them, time’s forks take on a direct
meaning which confounds flashback. The interpretation of

From, recollection to dreams                                          53
 Shakespeare’sJulius Caesar by Mankiewicz underlines the psycho­
 logical opposition between Brutus and Mark Antony. The fact is
 that Brutus appears to be an absolutely linear character: of course
 he is torn by his affection for Caesar, of course he is a skilful
 orator and politician, but his love of the republic sketches a
 perfectly straight course for him. We said that in Mankiewicz
 there is no character who develops in a linear way. Yet there is
 Brutus. But, precisely, after speaking to the people, he allows
 Mark Antony the chance to speak, without waiting himself or
 leaving an observer: he will find himself proscribed, assured of
 defeat, alone and backed into suicide, locked in his rectitude
 before he has been able to understand anything of what has
 happened. Mark Antony, on the contrary, is a supremely forked
 being: presenting himself as a soldier, playing on his unskilled
 speech, rough-spoken, with awkward phrasings, and plebeian
 accents, he sustains an extraordinary speech wholly in forks,
 which will make the Roman people turn (Mankiewicz’s art and
 Brando’s voice unite here in one of the finest scenes in theatre-
 cinema). Finally, in Cleopatra, it is Cleopatra who has become the
 eternal forking woman, devious, capricious, while Mark Antony
 (now played by Burton) is simply a prisoner of his insane passion,
 trapped between the recollection of Caesar and the proximity of
 Octavian. Hidden behind a pillar, he will witness one of Cleo­
 patra’s forkings before Octavian, and will take refuge in the
 background, but always to return to her. He too will die without
 understanding what has actually happened, although he redis­
 covers Cleopatra’s love in a final fork by her. All the pinks
 intensifying to golds testify to the universal changeability of
 Cleopatra. Mankiewicz disowned this film, which is no less
 magnificent for that; perhaps one of his main reasons was that he
 had been forced into too many rational, oppressive justifications
 of the forkings of the queen.
    We come to the same conclusion again: either the flashback is
 an unsophisticated, conventional notice or it gets a justification
 from elsewhere; Carne’s destiny, Mankiewicz’s forking time. But
 in these latter cases, what gives flashback a necessity does so only
 relatively, conditionally, and may be expressed in a different way.
 For there is not simply an insufficiency in the flashback in relation
 to the recollection-image; there is at a deeper level an insufficiency in
■the recollection-image in relation to the past. Bergson constantly
 reminded us that it was not by its own efforts that the recollection-
 image retained the mark of the past, that is, of ‘virtuality’ which it

54                                                         Cinema 2
represents and embodies, and which distinguishes it from other
types of images. If the image becomes ‘recollection-image’ it is
only in so far as it has been to look for a ‘pure recollection’ in the
place where it was, pure virtuality contained in the hidden zones
of the past as in oneself. . . ‘Pure recollections, summoned from
the depths of Memory develop into recollection-images’; ‘Ima­
gining is not recollecting. No doubt a recollection, as it becomes
actual, tends to live in an image, but the converse is not true, and
the image pure and simple will not be referred to the past unless,
indeed, it was in the past that I sought it, thus following the
continuous progress which brought it from darkness into light.”3
Contrary to our first hypothesis it is not, then, the recollectionimage which is sufficient to define the new dimension of
subjectivity. We asked: when a present, actual image has lost its
motor extension, with what virtual image does it enter into
relation, the two images forming a circuit where they run after
each other and each is reflected in the other? Now the recollection-image is not virtual, it actualizes a virtuality (which Bergson
calls ‘pure recollection’) on its own account. This is why the
recollection-image does not deliver the past to us, but only
represents the former present that the past ‘was’. The recollection-image is an image which is actualized or in process of being
made actual, which does not form with the actual, present image a
circuit of indiscernibility. Is this because the circuit is too broad,
or on the contrary not broad enough? In any case, once again, the
heroine of Europe 51 does not evoke a recollection-image. And
even when an author proceeds by flashback, he subordinates the
flashback to another process which gives it foundation, and the
recollection-image to deeper time-images (not only Mankiewicz,
but Welles, Resnais, etc.).
   There is no doubt that attentive recognition, when it succeeds,
comes about through recollection-images: it is the man I met last
week at such and such a place . . . But it is precisely this success
which allows the sensory-motor flux to take up its temporarily
interrupted course again. So that Bergson constantly circles
around the following conclusion, which will also haunt cinema:
attentive recognition informs us to a much greater degree when it
 fails than when it succeeds. When we cannot remember, sensory-
 motor extension remains suspended, and the actual image, the
 present optical perception, does not link up with either a motor
image or a recollection-image which would re-establish contact. It
 rather enters into relation with genuinely virtual elements,

From recollection to dreams                                        55
feelings of déjà vu or past ‘in general’ (I must have seen that man
somewhere . . .), dream-images (I have the feeling that I saw him
in a dream . . .). fantasies or theatre scenes (he seems to play a role
that I am familiar with . . .). In short, it is not the recollectionimage or attentive recognition which gives us the proper equiv­
alent of the optical-sound image, it is rather the disturbances of
memory and the failures of recognition.

                                  3
This is why European cinema at an early stage confronted a
group of phenomena; amnesia, hypnosis, hallucination, mad­
ness, the vision of the dying, and especially nightmare and dream.
This was an important aspect of Soviet cinema, and its various
alliances with futurism, constructivism and formalism; of
German expressionism and its various alliances with psychiatry
and psychoanalysis; and of the French school and its various
alliances with surrealism. European cinema saw in this a means of
breaking with the ‘American’ limitations of the action-image, and
also of reaching a mystery of time, of uniting image, thought and
camera in a single ‘automatic subjectivity’, in contrast to the
over-objective conception of the Americans.14 In fact, the first
common factor in all these states is that a character finds himself
prey to visual and sound sensations (or tactile ones, cutaneous or
coenaesthetic) which have lost their motor extension. This may be
a limit-situation, the imminent arrival or consequence of an
accident, the nearness of death but also the most ordinary states
of sleep, dream, or a disturbance of attention. And, in the second
place, these actual sensations and perceptions are as cut off from
memory-based recognition as they are from motor recognition:
no specific group of recollections comes to correspond to them,
and to fit into the optical and sound situation. But, what is very
different, it is a whole temporal ‘panorama’, an unstable set of
floating memories, images of a past in general which move past at
dizzying speed, as if time were achieving a profound freedom. It
is as if total and anarchic mobilizing of the past now responds to
the character’s motor powerlessness. Dissolves and super­
impositions arrive with a vengeance. It is in this way that
expressionism attempted to restore the ‘panoramic vision’ of
those who feel mortally threatened or lost: images thrown up

56                                                             Cinema 2
from the unconscious of a woman being operated on —Alfred
Abel’s Narcosis, from that of an assaulted man —Metzner’s Attack,
from that of a man in the middle of drowning —Fejos’ The Last
Moment. (Daybreak moves towards this limit, the hero getting
nearer to an inescapable death.) The same may be said of
dream-states or states of extreme sensory-motor relaxation: the
purely optical or sound perspectives of a divested present which
no longer enjoys links with a disconnected past, floating child­
hood memories, fantasies, or impressions of déjà vu. This is again
the most immediate or visible content of Fellini’s 8 V2 : from the
hero’s overwork and collapse from stress to the final panoramic
vision, taking in the nightmare of the underground passage and
the kite-man which is used as the film’s opening.
   The Bergsonian theory of dreams shows that the dream er is
not at all closed to the sensations of the external and internal
world. However, he no longer relates them to specific recollection-images, but to fluid, malleable sheets of past which are happy
with a very broad or floating adjustment. If we go back to
Bergson’s previous schema, the dream represents the largest visible
circuit or ’the outermost envelope’ of all the circuits.'" This is no longer
the sensory-motor link of the action-image in habitual recogni­
tion, but nor is it the various circuits of perception-recollection
which come to supplement it in attentive recognition; it would
rather be the weak and dislocatory connection between an optical
(or sound) sensation and a panoramic vision; between any
sensory image whatever and a total dream-image.
   What, more precisely, is the difference between a recollectionimage and a dream-image? We start from a perception-image,
the nature of which is to be actual. The recollection, in contrast —
what Bergson calls ‘pure recollection’ —is necessarily a virtual
image. But, in the first case, it becomes actual in so far as it is
summoned by the perception-image. It is actualized in a recollection-image which corresponds to the perception-image. The case
of dream brings two important differences to light. On the one
hand, the sleeper’s perceptions exist, but in the diffuse condition
of a dust of actual sensations —external and internal —which are
not grasped in themselves, escaping consciousness. On the other
hand, the virtual image which becomes actual does not do so
directly, but becomes actual in a different image, which itself
plays the role of virtual image being actualized in a third, and so
on to infinity: the dream is not a metaphor but a series of
anamorphoses which sketch out a very large circuit. These two

From recollection to dreams                                         57
characteristics are linked. When the sleeper is given over to the
actual luminous sensation of a green surface broken by white
patches, the dream er who lives in the sleeper may evoke the
image of a meadow dotted with flowers, but this image is only
actualized by already becoming the image of a billiard table
furnished with balls, which in turn does not become actual
without becoming something else. These are not metaphors, but
a becoming which can by right continue to infinity. In René Clair’s
Entr'acte, the dancer’s tutu seen from beneath ‘spreads out like a
flower’, and the flower ‘opens and closes its corolla, enlarges its
petals, and lengthens its stamens’, to turn back into the opening
legs of a dancer; the city lights become a ‘pile of lighted cigarettes'
in the hair of a man playing chess, cigarettes which in turn
become ‘the columns of a Greek temple, then of a silo, whilst the
chessboard becomes transparent to give a view of the Place de la
Concorde’."’ In Bunuel’s Un chien andalou the image of the
thinning cloud which bisects the moon is actualized, but by
passing into that of the razor which bisects the eye, thus
maintaining the role of virtual image in relation to the next one. A
tuft of hairs becomes a sea-urchin, which is transformed into a
circular Head of hair, to give way to a circle of onlookers.
American cinema grasped this state of the dream-image at least
once, in the conditions of Buster Keaton’s burlesque, due to its
natural affinity with surrealism, or rather with Dadaism. In the
dream in SherlockJunior, the image of the unbalanced chair in the
garden gives way to the somersault in the street, then to the
precipice at the edge of which the hero leans, but in the jaws of a
lion, then to the desert and the cactus on which he sits down, then
to the litde hill which gives birth to an island battered by the
waves, where he dives into an already snowy expanse, from which
he emerges to find himself back in the garden. Sometimes the
dream-images are scattered thoughout a film, in such a way that it
is possible to reconstitute them in their totality. Thus, with
Hitchcock’s Spellbound the real dream does not appear in the
Daliesque paste and cardboard sequence, but is shared between
widely separated elements: these are the impressions of a fork on
a sheet which will become stripes on pyjamas, to jum p to the
striations on a white cover, which will produce the widening-out
space of a washbasin, itself taken up by an enlarged glass of milk,
giving way in turn to a field of snow marked by parallel ski lines. A
series of scattered images which form a large circuit, of which
each one is like the virtuality of the next that makes it actual, until

58                                                          Cinema 2
all return together to the hidden sensation which has all the time
been actual in the hero’s unconscious, that of the lethal toboggan.
   Dream-images in turn seem to have two poles, which may be
distinguished according to their technical production. One
proceeds by rich and overloaded means — dissolves, super­
impositions, deframings, complex camera movements, special
effects, manipulations in the laboratory — going right to the
abstract, in the direction of abstracdon. The other, on the
contrary, is very restrained, working by clear cuts or montage-cut,
making progress simply through a perpetual unhinging which
‘looks like’ dream, but between objects that remain concrete. The
techniques of the image always refers to a metaphysics of the
imagination : it is like two ways of imagining the passage from one
image to the other. In this respect dreamlike states are, in relation
to the real, a bit like the ‘anomalous’ states of a language system in
relation to the current language: sometimes addition, compli­
cation, over-saturation, sometimes, in contrast, elimination, el­
lipse, break, cut, unhinging. If this second pole appears clearly in
Keaton’s Sherlock Junior, the first is the driving force of the great
dream in Murnau’s The Last Man, where the uncontrollable
batterers at the door are dissolved and superimposed, and tend
towards infinitely restless abstract angles. The opposition is
especially clear between Entr’acte and Un chien andalou: René
Clair’s film multiplies every technique, taking them in the
direction of cinetic abstraction of the last mad race, whilst Bunel’s
film works through more restrained means, and maintains the
dominant circular shape in the consistently concrete objects that
he has following one another through definite cuts.17 But,
whichever pole is chosen, the dream-image obeys the same law: a
large circuit where each image actualizes the preceding one and is
actualized in the subsequent one, to return in the end to the
situation which set it off. It does not, then, guarantee the
 indiscernibility of the real and the imaginary any more than the
 recollection-image does. The dream-image is subject to the
condition of attributing the dream to a dreamer, and the
 awareness of the dream (the real) to the viewer. Buster Keaton
 purposely accentuates the split by making a frame which re­
sembles a screen, in such a way that the hero goes from the
semi-darkness of the room to the completely lit-up world of the
screen. ..
    Perhaps there is a way to go beyond this split in the large circuit,
 through states of reverie, of waking dream, of strangeness or

From recollection to dreams                                          59
enchantment. For the whole group of these states, which differ
from the explicit dream, Michel Devillers proposed a very
interesting notion, that of ‘implied dream’.1'1 The optical and
sound image is quite cut off from its motor extension, but it no
longer compensates for this loss by entering into relation with
explicit recollection-images or dream-images. If we likewise
attempt to define this state of implied dream, we would say that
the optical and sound image extends into movement of world. There
is definitely return to movement (hence its insufficiency again).
But it is no longer the character who reacts to the optical-sound
situation, it is a movement of world which supplements the
faltering movement of the character. There takes place a kind of
worldizing [mondialization] or ‘societizing’ [mondianization], a
depersonalizing, a pronominalizing of the lost or blocked move­
m ent.1'1T he road is not slippery without sliding on itself. The
frightened child faced with danger cannot run away, but the
world sets about running away for him and takes him with it, as if
on a conveyor belt. Characters do not move, but, as in an
animated film, the camera causes the movement of the path on
which they change places, ‘motionless at a great pace’. The world
takes responsibility for the movement that the subject can no
longer or cannot make. This is a virtual movement, but it becomes
actual at the price of an expansion of the totality of space and of a
stretching of time. It is therefore the limit of the largest circuit. O f
course, these phenomena already appear in the dream: in
Buñuel’s Los Olvidados, in the dream of the Virgin with the chunk
of meat, the child is slowly sucked towards the meat rather than
thrusting himself forward; in the nightmare in Murnau’s Phan­
tom, the dreamer pursues the carriage, but is himself urged on by
the shadow of the houses which pursue him. However, it seems to
us that the explicit dream contains or retains these movements of
world which are, on the contrary, liberated in the implied dream.
   One of the first great works in this direction was Epstein’s The
Fall of the House of Usher: the optical perceptions of things,
landscapes, or furniture, extend into infinitely stretched gestures
which depersonalize movement. Slow motion frees movement
from its moving body to make a sliding of world, a sliding of
ground, up to the final fall of the house. Hathaway’s Peter Ibbetson
is less an American film of dream than an implied dream,
culminating with the avalanche of rocks and the collapse of the
castle made of clouds. The only film by Laughton, Night of the
Hunter, shows us the great pursuit of the children by the

60                                                         Cinema 2
preacher; but the latter is dispossessed of his own movement of
pursuit in favour of his silhouette as shadow theatre, whilst the
whole of nature takes on the responsibility of the children’s
movement of flight, and the boat where they take refuge seems
itself a motionless shelter on a floating island or a conveyor belt.
In most of his films Louis Malle has more or less obviously used
movement of world, hence the enchantment of this work: the bolt
from the blue in The Lovers is mixed up with the extensions of the
park and the moon in the boat trip; bodily states themselves link
up with movements of world. From Lift to the Scaffold, it was the
halting of the lift which blocked the m urderer’s movement, to put
in its place movements of world involving the other characters.
The culmination is Black Moon, where the depersonalized move­
ments take the heroine with the unicorn from one world to
another and still another: it is by running away from the initial
images of violence that the heroine moves from one world to the
other, in the sense that Sartre says that each dream is a world, and
even each phase or image of dream.2" Each is marked by animals,
and is peopled by inversions (sound-inversion of speech, aber­
rations of behaviour such as when the old woman talks to the rats
and sucks the girl’s breast). In Malle, it is always a movement of
world which brings the character to incest, prostitution, or
disgrace, and makes him capable of a crime like the one dreamed
of by the old man who tells tall stories (Atlantic City). In the whole
cinema of enchantment these universalized, depersonalized and
pronominalized movements, with their slow motion or rushing,
with their inversions, pass just as much through nature as
through artifice and the manufactured object. It was precisely a
whole enchantment of artifice and inversion that L’Herbier had
exhibited in The Fantastic Night, in order to extend the states of an
apparent sleeper. Neo-realism does not go back on, but on the
contrary remains true to, its aims, when it extends optical and
sound situations into artificial, yet cosmic movements which
involve characters: not only De Sica’s enchantment in Miracle in
Milan, but all Fellini’s fairgrounds, with rides, slides, tunnels,
stairways, rockets, or big dippers which ‘must lead the visitorviewer from one particular space-time to another similarly
autonomous space-time’ (especially City of Women).2'
   Musical comedy is the supreme depersonalized and prono­
minalized movement, the dance which outlines a dreamlike world
as it goes. In Berkeley, the multiplied and reflected girls form an
enchanted proletariat whose bodies, legs and faces are the parts

From recollection to dreams                                        61
of a gTeat transformational machine: the ‘shapes’ are like
kaleidoscopic views which contract and dilate in an earthly or
watery space, usually shot from above, turning around the
vertical axis and changing into each other to end up as pure
abstractions.22 O f course, even in Berkeley, and all the more in
musical comedy in general, the dancer or couple retain an
individuality as creative source of movement. But what counts is
the way in which the dancer’s individual genius, his subjectivity,
moves from a personal motivity to a supra-personal element, to a
movement of world that the dance will outline. This is the
moment of truth where the dancer is still going, but already a
sleepwalker, who will be taken over by the movement which
seems to summon him: this can be seen with Fred Astaire in the
walk which imperceptibly becomes dance (Minnelli’s Band
Wagon) as well as with Kelly in the dance which seems to have its
origin in the unevenness of the pavement (Donen’s Singing in the
Rain). Between the motor step and the dance step there is
sometimes what Alain Masson calls a ‘degree zero’, like a
hesitation, a discrepancy, a making late, a series of preparatory
blunders (Sandrich’s Follow the Fleet), or on the contrary a sudden
birth (Top Hat). Astaire’s style has often been contrasted with
Kelly’s. And it is true that, in the former, the centre of gravity
passes outside his slight body, floats beyond him, and defies
verticality, rolls crosswise, and follows a line which is now only
that of his silhouette, his shadow or his shadows, to the extent that
it is his shadows which dance with him (Stevens’s Swingtime).
Whilst, in the latter, the centre of gravity grounds itself vertically
in a compact body, to free and raise up from the inside the
mannequin who is the dancer. ‘Powerful acrobat’s movements
often augment the enthusiasm and force of Kelly, the way that he
gives himself some spring with a jum p is somedmes easy to see.
Astaire’s gestures, in contrast, link up through a clear will of the
intellect, without ever surrendering movement to the body’, and
define ‘successive and perfect shadows’.23 It is like the two
extremes of grace as defined by Kleist, ‘in the body of a man
endrely deprived of consciousness and of the man who possesses
an infinite consciousness’, Kelly and Astaire. But, in both cases,
musical comedy is not content to get us into the dance, or, what
amounts to the same thing, to make us dream. The cinematogra­
phic act consists in this: that the dancer himself begins dancing, as
one starts to dream. If musical comedy gives us in an explicit way
so many scenes which work like dreams or pseudo-dreams with

62                                                           Cinema 2
metamorphoses (Singing in the Rain, Band Wagon, and especially
Minnelli’s An American in Paris), it is because it is entirely a gigantic
dream, but an implied dream, which in turn implies the passage
of a presumed reality in the dream.
   However, even presumed, this reality is quite ambiguous. We
might present the case in two ways. On one hand we think that
musical comedy gives us in the first place ordinary sensory-motor
images, where the characters find themselves in situations to
which they will respond through their actions, but that more or
less progressively their personal actions and movements are
transformed by dance into movement of world which goes
beyond the motor situation, only to return to it, etc. O r we
suppose, on the other hand, that the point of departure only gave
the appearance of being a sensory-motor situation: at a deeper
level it was a pure optical and sound situation which had already
lost its motor extension; it was a pure description which had
already replaced its object, a film set pure and simple. In this case
the movement of world responds directly to the call of opsigns
and sonsigns (and the ‘degree zero’ no longer signals a progress­
ive transformation but the cancelling of the ordinary sensorymotor links). In the first case, in the words of Masson, we move
from the narrative to the spectacular, we are admitted to the
implied dream; in the other we go from the spectacular to the
spectacle, just as from the film set to the dance, in the whole of an
implied dream which even envelops walking. The two points of
view are superimposed in musical comedy, but it is clear that the
second is more comprehensive. In Stanley Donen, the sensorymotor situation allows ‘flat views’ to show through, postcards or
snapshots of landscapes, towns and silhouettes. It gives way to
those purely optical and sound situations where colour takes on a
fundamental value, and the action, itself flattened, is no longer
distinguishable from a moving element of the coloured film set.
So dance arises directly as the dreamlike power which gives depth
and life to these flat views, which makes use of a whole space in the
film set and beyond, which gives a world to the image, surrounds
it with an atmosphere of world (Pyjama Picnic, Singing in the Rain,
not just the dance in the street but the Broadway finale). ‘Dance
will thus guarantee the transition between the flat view and the
opening up of space.’24 It will be the movement of the world which
corresponds, in the dream, to the optical and sound image.
    It fell to Minnelli to discover that dance does not simply give a
 fluid world to images, but that there are as many worlds as

From recollection to dreams                                     63
images: ‘Every image’, Sartre said, ‘is surrounded by an atmos­
phere of world.’ The plurality of worlds is Minnelli’s first
discovery, his very great position in cinema. But how, then, do we
pass from one world to the other? This is the second discovery;
dance is no longer simply movement of world, but passage from
one world to another, entry into another world, breaking in and
exploring. It is no longer a matter of going from a world which is
real in general to particular dream-worlds, since the real world
would presuppose those links that the worlds of dreams seem to
disallow us, as in the inversion in Brigadoon, where the reality,
from which we are separated by the immortal and isolated village,
is now visible only in a vast high-angle shot. In Minnelli, every
world and every dream is shut in on itself, closed up around
everything it contains, including the dreamer. He has his
prisoner-sleepwalkers, his women-panthers, his women-warders
and his sirens. Each set attains its fullest power, and becomes pure
description of world which replaces the situation.25 Colour is
dream, not because the dream is in colour, but because colours in
Minnelli are given a highly absorbent, almost devouring, value.
This means that we have to insinuate ourselves, to let ourselves
become absorbed, without at the same time losing ourselves or
being snatched away. Dance is no longer the movement of dream
which outlines a world, but now acquires depth, grows stronger as
it becomes the sole means of entering into another world, that is,
into another’s world, into another’s dream or past. Yolande and
The Pirate will be the two great successes where Astaire and then
Kelly introduce themselves respectively into a girl’s dreams, and
not without mortal danger.26 And, in all the works that are not
musical comedy, but just comedies or dramas, Minnelli has to
have an equivalent of dance and song which always introduces the
character into the other’s dream. In Undercurrent, the young wife
will go to the very heart of her husband’s nightmare, on a Brahms
tune, to reach the dream and love of the unknown brother, so
 passing from one world to another. It is an escalator as movement
of world which, in The Clock, breaks the heel on the girl’s shoe and
carries her away into the waking dream of the soldier on leave.
With the grandiose Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse it takes the
heavy gallop of the knights and the horrible recollection of the
stricken father to snatch the aesthete from his own dream and get
 him into the generalized nightmare of the war. Reality from this
 point on will necessarily be conceived sometimes as the heart of a
 nightmare, when the hero dies of being in this way a prisoner of

64                                                         Cinema 2
the dream of the Other (not only The Four Horsemen, but in
Brigadoon the death of the man attempting to escape), sometimes
as a harmony of dreams with each other, in a happy ending where
each person finds himself again by being absorbed into the
opposite (thus, in The Perfect Wife, the dancer who reconciles the
two worlds in conflict). The relation between set-description and
movement-dance is no longer as with Donen, that between a flat
view and an organization of space, but that between an absorbent
world and a passage between worlds, for better or for worse.
Musical comedy has never come as close to a mystery of memory,
of dream and of time, as a point of indiscernibility of the real and
the imaginary, as in Minnelli. A strange and fascinating concep­
tion of dream, where the dream is all the more implied because it
always refers to the dream of another, or else — as in the
masterpiece Madame Bovary — constitutes itself a devouring,
merciless power, for its real subject.
   Perhaps the renewal of burlesque by Jerry Lewis owes many of
its elements to musical comedy. We can briefly summarize the
succeeding ages of burlesque: it all began with an enormous
exaltation of sensory-motor situations, where the links of each of
them were enlarged and brought forward, indefinitely extended;
where the junctures and shocks between their independent
causal series were multiplied, forming a proliferating whole. And
in the second age this element would survive, with enrichments
and purifications (Keaton’s trajectories, Lloyd’s ascending series,
the dismantled series of Laurel and Hardy). But what char­
acterizes this second age is the introduction of a very strong
emotive, affective element into the sensory-motor scheme: this is
embodied, for example, in the pure quality of Buster Keaton’s
impassive, reflective face, and also in the power of Chaplin’s
intense and variable face, in accordance with the two poles of the
action-image; however, in both cases, it is inserted and spreads
into the form of the action, whether it opens the ‘small form’ of
Chaplin or envelops and transforms the ‘large form ’ of Keaton.
This affective element is found in the moonstruck pierrots
[pierrots lunaires] of burlesque: Laurel is lunatic, but so is Langdon
with his irresistible sleeps and waking dreams, and Harpo Marx’s
dumb character in the violence of his drives and the peace of his
harp. But even with Langdon, the affective element always
remains caught up in the mazes of the sensory-motor schema or
of the movement-image, giving the shocks and encounters of
causal series a new dimension which was lacking in the first age.

From recollection to dreams                                         65
The third age of burlesque implies the talkie, but the talkie comes
in here only as the support or condition of a new image: it is the
mental image which takes a sensory-motor texture to its limit, this
time regulating the detours, encounters and shocks by a chain of
logical relations as irrefutable as they are absurd or provocative.
This mental image is the discursive image as it appears in the big
speeches in Chaplin’s talking films; it is also the argument-image
in the nonsense of Groucho Marx or of Fields. Brief as this
analysis is, it may lead us to foresee how a fourth stage or age is
going to arise: a breaking of sensory-motor links, an inauguration
of pure optical and sound situations which, instead of extending
into action, enter into a circuit which turns back on them, then
launch another circuit. This is what we see in Jerry Lewis. The set
has its own importance, pure description having replaced its
object, as in the famous girls’ house seen in its entirety in section in
Ladies’ Man, whilst the action gives way to the grand ballet of the
Devouring Woman and the hero become dancer. It is in this sense
that Jerry Lewis’s burlesque finds its source in musical comedy.2'
And even the way he walks seems likç so many misperformed
dance steps, an extended and recommenced ‘degree zero’, with
every possible variation, until the perfect dance is born (The
Patsy).
   The sets present an intensification of forms, colours and
sounds. Jerry Lewis’s character, more involuted than infantile, is
such that everything resonates in his head and soul; but,
conversely, his smallest sketched or inhibited gestures, and the
inarticulate sounds he comes out with, in turn resonate, because
they set off a movement of world which goes as far as catastrophe
(the destruction of the set at the music professor’s in The Patsy), or
which travels from one world to another, in a pulverizing of
colours, a metamorphosis of forms and a mutation of sounds (The
Nutty Professor). Lewis takes up a classic figure of American
cinema, that of the Loser,w* of the born loser, whose definition is:
he ‘goes too far’. But it is precisely in the burlesque dimension that
this ‘too far’ becomes movement of world which saves him and
will make him a winner. His body is shaken by spasms and various
currents, successive waves, as when he is going to throw the dice
(Hollywood or Bust). This is no longer the age of the tool or
machine, as they appear in the earlier stages, notably in the
machines of Keaton that we have described. This is a new age of
electronics, and the remote controlled object which substitutes
optical and sound signs for sensory-motor ones. It is no longer the

66                                                        Cinema 2
machine that goes wrong and goes mad, like the feeding-machine
in Modem Times, it is the cold rationality of the autonomous
technical object which reacts on the situation and ravages the set:
not just the electronic house and the lawn-mowers in It’s Only
Money, but the caddies who destroy the self-service (The Disorderly
Orderly) and the Hoover that devours everything in the shop,
goods, clothes, customers and wallpaper (Who's Minding the
Store)}'3The new burlesque no longer originates in an output of
energy by the character, who spreads and grows as before. It
arises from the fact that the character places himself (involunta­
rily) on an energy band which carries him along and which is
 precisely movement of world, a new way of dancing, of modulat­
ing: ‘the low frequency wave-action takes the place of heavy duty
 mechanics and the full blownness of gestures’.3" It is here for
once, that it can be said that Bergson is outstripped: the comic is
 no longer something mechanical stuck on to something living, but
movement of world carrying away and sucking up the living.
Jerry Lewis’s use of modern techniques taken to extremes
 (particularly the electronic circuit which he invented) is only of
interest because it corresponds to the form and content of this
 new burlesque image. Pure optical and sound situations, which
are no longer extended into action, but are connected back to a
wave. And it is this wave, movement of world on which the
character is placed as if in orbit, which will provoke the finest of
Jerry Lewis’s themes, in that very special fantasizing or that state
of implied dream: the ‘proliferations’ by which the burlesque
character makes others swarm together (the six uncles in Family
Jewels), or implicates others who are absorbed (the three in Three
on a Couch)', the cases o f‘spontaneous generation’ of faces, bodies,
or crowds; the ‘agglutinations’ of characters who meet, join
together and separate (The Big Mouth)?'
   This new age of burlesque was invented by Tati in his own way,
without there being a resemblance but with a lot of correspond­
ences between the two authors. In Tati, the pane, the ‘shop
window’, became the supreme optical and sound situation. The
waiting-room in Playtime, the exhibition park in Traffic (as
essential as the fairground in Fellini) were so many setdescriptions, opsigns and sonsigns which made up burlesque’s
 new substance.32 Sound, as we shall see, enters into profoundly
creative relations with the visual, because both cease to be
integrated into simple sensory-motor schemata. It is enough for
 Mr Hulot to appear, with his walk which at each step gives birth to

From recollection to dreams                                        67
a dancer which it takes up and sets off again : a cosmic wave enters,
like the wind and storm in the little beach hotel in Mr Hulot's
Holiday, the electronic house in Mon oncle breaks down in a
depersonalized, pronominalized movement; the restaurant in
Playtime goes to pieces in a flourish which suppresses one
description in order to give rise to a different one. Mr Hulot is
always ready to be carried away by the movements of world to
which he gives rise or rather which themselves wait for him to be
born. The whole genius of Tati is a low-frequency wave-action,
but one which spreads Mr Hulots everywhere, forms and breaks
up groups, joins and separates characters, in a kind of modern
ballet, like that of the little cobbles in the garden in Mon oncle, or
the scene of the mechanics’ weightlessness in Traffic. The awaited
fireworks in Mr Hulot’s Holiday are already, as Daney says of
Parade, the luminous trail of colours in an electronic landscape.
   Tati hid away his own fantasizing and restrained any move­
ment of musical comedy which could come from it, in favour of
sound and visual configurations capable of making up a new
op’art, a new son’art. It is Jacques Demy who takes up the thread,
not with musical comedy, but a sung opera, a popular opera, as he
calls it. He perhaps takes up the thread with what was most
original in René Clair, when the situation became pure set valid
for itself, whilst the action gave way to a popular sung ballet where
the groups and characters chased each other, crossed in front of
each other, played pass the slipper and the four corners game. '3*
In Demy we witness optical and sound situations realized by
coloured set-descriptions, which no longer extend into actions
but into songs, producing in some sense an ‘unhooking’, a
‘discrepancy’ of the action. We find both levels: on one hand
sensory-motor situations defined by the city, its people, its classes,
the relations, actions and passions of the characters. But, in
another way, and at a deeper level, the city merges with what
provides the set in it, Pommeraye passage; and the sung action
becomes a movement of city and classes, where the characters
pass without recognizing each other, or on the contrary find each
other, take up opposite positions, unite, stir each other up and
separate in a purely optical and sound situation which traces an
implied dream around them, ‘charmed circle’ or real ‘enchant­
ment’.34 As with Lewis and Tati, it is set which replaces situation,
and the to-and-fro which replaces action.

4      The crystals of time

                                  1
The cinema does not just present images, it surrounds them with
a world. This is why, very early on, it looked for bigger and bigger
circuits which would unite an actual image with recollectionimages, dream-images and world-images. This is surely the
extension that Godard calls into question in Slow Motion, when he
takes issue with the vision of the dying (‘I’m not dead, because my
life hasn’t passed before me’). Should not the opposite direction
have been pursued? Contracting the image instead of dilating it.
Searching for the smallest circuit that functions as internal limit
for all the others and that puts the actual image beside á kind of
immediate, symmetrical, consecutive or even simultaneous
double. The broad circuits of recollection in dream assume this
narrow base, this extreme point, and not the other way round.
This sort of direction already appears in links through flashback:
in Mankiewicz, a short circuit is produced between the character
who tells a story ‘in the past’ and the same person in so far as he
has surprised something in order to be able to relate it; in Carné,
in Daybreak, all the circuits of recollection which bring us back
each time to the hotel room, rest on a small circuit, the recent
recollection of the m urder which has just taken place in this very
same room. If we take this direction to its limit, we can say that the
actual image itself has a virtual image which corresponds to it like
a double or a reflection. In Bergsonian terms, the real object is
reflected in a mirror-image as in the virtual object which, from its
side and simultaneously, envelops or reflects the real: there is
‘coalescence’ between the two.1There is a formation of an image
with two sides, actual and virtual. It is as if an image in a mirror, a
photo or a postcard came to life, assumed independence and
passed into the actual, even if this meant that the actual image
returned into the m irror and resumed its place in the postcard or
photo, following a double movement of liberation and capture.
   We recognize here the very specific genre of description which,
according to Robbe-Grillet’s requirement, instead of being con­
cerned with a supposedly distinct object constantly both absorbs
and creates its own object.2 Ever vaster circuits will be able to

The crystals of time                                               69
develop, corresponding to deeper and deeper layers of reality
and higher and higher levels of memory or thought. But it is this
most restricted circuit of the actual image and its virtual image
which carries everything, and serves as internal limit. We have
seen how, on the broader trajectories, perception and recollec­
tion, the real and the imaginary, the physical and the mental, or
rather their images, continually followed each other, running
behind each other and referring back to each other around a
point of indiscemibility. But this point of indiscernibility is
precisely constituted by the smallest circle, that is, the coalescence
of the actual image and the virtual image, the image with two
sides, actual and virtual at the same time. We gave the name
opsign (and sonsign) to the actual image cut off from its motor
extension: it then formed large circuits, and entered into
communication with what could appear as recollection-images,
dream-images and world-images. But here we see that the opsign
finds its true genetic element when the actual optical image
crystallizes with its ovm virtual image, on the small internal circuit.
This is a crystal-image, which gives us the key, or rather the
‘heart’, of opsigns and their compositions. The latter are nothing
other than slivers of crystal-images.
   The crystal-image, or crystalline description, has two definite
sides which are not to be confused. For the confusion of the real
and the imaginary is a simple error of fact, and does not affect
their discernibility: the confusion is produced solely ‘in someone’s
head’. But indiscemibility constitutes an objective illusion; it does
not suppress the distinction between the two sides, but makes it
unattributable, each side taking the other’s role in a relation
which we must describe as reciprocal presupposition, or reversi­
bility.3 In fact, there is no virtual which does not become actual in
relation to the actual, the latter becoming virtual through the
same relation: it is a place and its obverse which are totally
reversible. These are ‘mutual images’ as Bachelard puts it, where
an exchange is carried out.4 The indiscernibility of the real and
the imaginary, or of the present and the past, of the actual and the
virtual, is definitely not produced in the head or the mind, it is the
objective characteristic of certain existing images which are by
nature double. Hence two orders of problems arise, one of
structure, the other of genesis. First, what are these consolidates
of actual and virtual which define a crystalline structure (in a
general, aesthetic, rather than a scientific, sense)? And, later on,
what is the genetic process which appears in these structures?

70                                                           Cinema 2
   The most familiar case is the mirror. Oblique mirrors, concave
and convex mirrors and Venetian mirrors are inseparable from a
circuit, as can be seen throughout Ophuls’s work, and in Losey,
especially in Eve and The S e r v a n tThis circuit itself is an
exchange: the mirror-image is virtual in relation to the actual
character that the m irror catches, but it is actual in the mirror
which now leaves the character with only a virtuality and pushes
him back out-of-field. The exchange is all the more active when
the circuit refers to a polygon with a growing number of sides: as
in a face reflected on the facets of a ring, an actor seen in an
infinity of twins. When virtual images proliferate like this, all
together they absorb the entire actuality of the character, at the
same time as the character is no more than one virtuality among
others. This situation was prefigured in Welles’s Citizen Kane,
when Kane passes between two facing mirrors; but it comes to the
 fore in its pure state in the famous palace of mirrors in The Lady
from Shanghai, where the principle of indiscernibility reaches its
 peak: a perfect crystal-image where the multiple mirrors have
 assumed the actuality of the two characters who will only be able
 to win it back by smashing them all, finding themselves side by
 side and each killing the other.
    The actual image and its virtual image thus constitute the
 smallest internal circuit, ultimately a peak or point, but a physical
 point which has distinct elements (a bit like the epicurean atom).
 Distinct, but indiscernible, such are the actual and the virtual
 which are in continual exchange. When the virtual image
 becomes actual, it is then visible and limpid, as in the m irror or the
 solidity of finished crystal. But the actual image becomes virtual in
 its turn, referred elsewhere, invisible, opaque and shadowy, like a
 crystal barely dislodged from the earth. The actual-virtual couple
 thus immediately extends into the opaque-limpid, the expression
 of their exchange. But it needs only a modification of conditions
 (notably of temperature) for the limpid face to darken, and for
 the opaque face to acquire or rediscover its limpidity. The
 exchange is started again. So long as the conditions are not made
 precise there is definitely a distinction between the two sides, but
 they are indiscernible. This situation seems to bring us close to
 science. And it is no accident that it is developed in Zanussi as a
 result of a scientific inspiration. What interests Zanussi, however,
 is the ‘power’ of science, its relation to life, and first of all its
 projection into the life of men of science themselves.6 The
 Structure of Crystals clearly shows two men of science, one of whom

The crystals of time                                                71
shines and already possesses all the light of official science, pure
science, whilst the other has withdrawn into an opaque life and
obscure tasks. But, from another point of view, is it not the
obscure face which becomes luminous, even if this light is no
longer that of science, even if it becomes more like faith as in an
Augustinian ‘illumination’, whilst the representatives of pure
science become peculiarly opaque and pursue projects with a
shameful will to power (Camouflage, The Imperative)} Zanussi is one
of those authors who, since Dreyer, have known how to enrich
dialogue with a religious, metaphysical, or scientific content,
while still keeping it as the most everyday and trivial determin­
ation. And this success comes precisely from a principle of
indiscernibility. Which is luminous, the clear scientific schema of
a brain section, or the opaque cranial dome of a monk at prayer
(Illumination)? Between the two distinct sides, a doubt will always
remain, preventing us from knowing which is limpid and which is
dark, considering the conditions. In A Woman’s Decision, the two
protagonists ‘stay in the middle [milieu] of their fight, frozen and
covered in mud, while the sun rises’.7 This is because the
conditions echo the environment [milieu] too, like the weather
conditions that we see again and again in Zanussi. The crystal is
 no longer reducible to the external position of two mirrors face to
 face, but to the internal disposition of a seed in relation to the
 environment. What will be the seed with which we can sow the
 environment, this desert-like and snowy expanse which is opened
 out in Zanussi’s films? O r else, despite men’s efforts, will the
 environment remain amorphous, at the same time as the crystal is
 emptied of its interiority, and as the seed is only a seed of death,
 fatal illness, or suicide (Spiral)? Exchange or indiscernibility thus
 follow each other in three ways in the crystalline circuit: the actual
 and the virtual (or the two mirrors face to face); the limpid and
 the opaque; the seed and the environment. Zanussi attempts to
 bring the whole cinema under the influence of these various
 aspects of an uncertainty principle.
    Zanussi has made an actor out of the man of science; that is, a
 dramatic being par excellence. But this was already the situation of
 the actor in himself: the crystal is a stage, or rather a track [piste],
 before being an amphitheatre. The actor is bracketed with his
 public role: he makes the virtual image of the role actual, so that
 the role becomes visible and luminous. The actor is a ‘monster’, or
 rather monsters are born actors —Siamese twin, limbless man —
 because they find a role in the excess or shortcoming that affects

72                                                              Cinema 2
 them. But the more the virtual image of the role becomes actual
and limpid, the more the actual image of the actor moves into the
shadows and becomes opaque: there will be a private project of
 the actor, a dark vengeance, a strangely obscure criminal or
justice-bringing activity. And this underground activity will
detach itself and become visible in turn, as the interrupted role
 falls back into opacity. We can already recognize the dominant
 theme of Tod Browning’s work, in silent film. A fake limbless
 man takes to his role and has his arms really cut off, for the love of
 the woman who could not bear men’s hands, but tries to recover
 his dignity by organizing the m urder of a rival who is whole (The
 Unknown). In The Unholy Three, the ventriloquist Echo can no
 longer speak except through his dummy, but regains control of
 himself in the criminal project he pursues disguised as an old
 woman, even though he confesses his crime through the mouth
 of the man who was wrongly accused. The monsters in Freaks are
 monsters only because they have been forced to move into their
 explicit role, and it is through a dark vengeance that they find
 themselves again and regain a strange clarity which arrives in the
 lightning to interrupt their role.8 In The Black Bird it is in the
 course of a transformation that ‘the actor’ is struck by paralysis,
 when he was going to use his role of bishop in a criminal intent: as
 if the monstrous exchange suddenly froze. An abnormal, suffo­
 cating slowness permeates Browning’s characters in general, in
 the crystal. What we see in Browning is not a reflection on the
 theatre or the circus, as we will see in others, but a double face of
 the actor, that only the cinema could capture by instituting its own
 circuit. The virtual image of the public role becomes actual, but in
 relation to the virtual image of a private crime, which becomes
 actual in turn and replaces the first image. We no longer know
 which is the role and which is the crime. Perhaps it needed an
 extraordinary understanding between an actor and an author:
 Browning and Lon Chaney. This crystalline circuit of the actor,
 its transparent face and its opaque face, is travesty. If Browning
 achieved a poetry of the unassignable in this way, it seems that two
 great films of travesty have inherited his inspiration: Hitchcock’s
 Murder, and Ichikawa's An Actor’s Revenge, with its marvellous
 black backgrounds.
    To such a varied list we should add the ship. It too is a track, a
 circuit. It is as if, as in T urner’s paintings, splitting in two is not an
 accident, but a power which is part of the ship. It is Herman
 Melville who, in his novels, fixed this structure for all time. Seed

The crystals of time                                               73
impregnating the sea, the ship is caught between its two crystal­
line faces: a limpid face which is the ship from above, where
everything should be visible, according to order; an opaque face
which is the ship from below, and which occurs underwater, the
black face of the engine-room stokers. But it is as if the limpid face
actualizes a kind of theatre or dramaturgy which takes hold of the
passengers themselves, whilst the virtual passes into the opaque
face, and is actualized in turn in the settling of scores between
engineers, in the demonic perversity of a boatswain, in a captain’s
obsession, in the secret revenge of insurgent blacks.9 This is the
circuit of two virtual images which continually become actual in
relation to each other, and are continually revived. It is not so
much Huston’s Moby Dick which gives the cinematographic
version of the ship, but rather Welles’s The Lady from Shanghai, in
which the majority of the forms of the crystal-image are un­
doubtedly to be found: the yacht called ‘The Circe’ reveals a
visible face and an invisible face, a limpid face that for a moment
the naive hero allows himself to be caught by, while the other face,
the opaque one, the great dark stage of the aquarium of
monsters, rises in silence and grows as the first one becomes vague
or blurred. And, in a different way, it is Fellini who discovers,
beyond the circus-track, a circuit of the ship as ultimate fate. The
ship in Amarcord already presented itself as a vast seed of death or
life on the sea of plastic. But, in The Ship Sails On, the ship makes
the face of a growing polygon proliferate. It initially splits in two
according to the division of bottom and top: the entire visible
order of the ship and its sailors is at the service of the grand
dramaturgical project of the singer-passengers; but, when these
passengers from the top come to see the proletariat at the bottom,
it is the latter who become in turn spectators, and listeners to the
singing competition which they impose on those at the top, or to
the musical competition in the kitchens. Then the split changes its
orientation and now divides the singer-passengers and the
proletarian-shipwrecked on the bridge: here again the exchange
is made between the actual and the virtual, the limpid and the
opaque, in a Bartok-like musical device. Then, later, the split has
become almost a splitting in two: the dark warship, blind and
closed-up, terrifying, which arrives to reclaim the fugitives, is
actualized all the better because the transparent ship carried out
its funerary dramaturgy in a marvellous circuit of faster and
faster images where the two ships end up exploding and sinking,
giving back to the sea what ends up as the sea, an eternally

74                                                        Cinema 2
amorphous environment, a melancholy rhinoceros which stands
for Moby Dick. This is the mutual image, this is the cycle of the
crystal ship in a pictorial and musical end of the world, and,
among the final gestures, the young maniacal terrorist who
cannot stop himself throwing a final bomb into the dark ship’s
narrow porthole.
   The ship can also be the ship of the dead, the nave of a simple
chapel as place of an exchange. The virtual survival of the dead
can be actualized, but is this not at the price of our existence,
which becomes virtual in turn? Is it the dead who belong to us, or
we who belong to the dead? And do we love them against the
living, or for and with life? T ruffaut’s fine film, The Green Room,
arranges the four faces which form a strange green crystal, an
emerald. At one point, the hero hides in a little shelter with dulled
windows with green reflections, where he seems to have a
glaucous existence, where it is impossible to tell whether he is
living or dead. And in the chapel’s crystal can be seen a thousand
candles, a bush of fire which is always missing a branch to make it
into the ‘perfect figure’. The final candle of he or she who has
been able to light only the last-but-one will always be missing, in
an irreducible persistence of life which makes the crystal infinite.
   The crystal is expression. Expression moves from the m irror to
the seed. It is the same circuit which passes through three figures,
the actual and the virtual, the limpid and the opaque, the seed
and the environment. In fact, the seed is on the one hand the
virtual image which will crystallize an environment which is at
present [actuellement] amorphous; but on the other hand the latter
must have a structure which is virtually crystallizable, in relation
to which the seed now plays the role of actual image. Once again
the actual and the virtual are exchanged in an indiscernibility
which on each occasion allows distinction to survive. In a famous
sequence in Citizen Kane, the little glass ball breaks apart when it
falls from the hands of the dying man, but the snow that it
contained seems to come towards us in gusts to impregnate the
environment [milieux] that we will discover. We do not know in
advance if the virtual seed (‘Rosebud’) will be actualized, because
we do not know in advance if the actual environment enjoys the
corresponding virtuality. Perhaps this is also the perspective from
which to understand the splendour of the images in Herzog’s
Heart of Glass, and the film’s double aspect. The search for the
alchemical heart and secret, for the red crystal, is inseparable
from the search for cosmic limits, as the highest tension of the

The crystals of time                                               75
spirit and the deepest level of reality. But the crystal’s fire will
have to connect with the whole range of manufacturing for the
world, for its part to stop being a flat, amorphous environment
which ends at the edge of a gulf, and to reveal infinite crystalline
potentialities in itself (‘the earth rises up from the waters, I see a
new earth . .         In this film Herzog has set out the greatest
crystal-images in the history of the cinema. There is an analogous
attempt in Tarkovsky, continued from one film to the next, but
always closed again: Mirror is a turning crystal, with two sides if we
relate it to the invisible adult character (his mother, his wife), with
four sides if we relate it to two visible couples (his mother and the
child he was, his wife and the child he has). And the crystal turns
on itself, like a homing device that searches an opaque environ­
ment: what is Russia, what is Russia .. .? The seed seems to be
frozen in these sodden, washed and heavily translucent images,
with their sometimes bluish, sometimes brown surfaces, while the
green environment seems, in the rain, to be unable to go beyond
the condition of a liquid crystal which keeps its secret. Are we to
believe that the soft planet Solaris gives a reply, and that it will
reconcile the ocean and thought, the environment and the seed,
at once designating the transparent face of the crystal (the
rediscovered woman) and the crystallizable form of the universe
(the rediscovered dwelling)? Solaris does not open up this
optimism, and Stalker returns the environment to the opacity of
an indeterminate zone, and the seed to the morbidity of some­
thing aborting, a closed door. Tarkovsky’s wash11' (the woman
also washes her hair against a wet wall in Mirror), the rains that
provide rhythm for each film, as intense as in Antonioni or
Kurosawa, but with different functions, constantly bring us back
to the question: what burning bush, what fire, what soul, what
sponge will staunch this earth? Serge Daney observed that, after
Dovzhenko, certain Soviet film-makers (or those from eastern
Europe like Zanussi) kept the taste for heavy materials and dense
still lifes which were, in constrast, removed by the movementimage in western cinema.12 In the crystal-image there is this
mutual search —blind and halting —of matter and spirit: beyond
the movement-image, ‘in which we are still pious’.
   The seed and the m irror are taken up yet again, the one in the
work in process of being made, the other in the work reflected in
the work. These two themes, which had run through all the other
arts, had to affect cinema as well. Sometimes it is the film which is
reflected in a theatre play, a show, a painting, or, better, a film

76                                                        Cinema 2
within the film; sometimes it is the film which takes itself as its
object in the process of its making or of its setbacks in being made.
And sometimes the two themes are quite distinct: in Eisenstein,
the montage of attractions already produced images in the mirror;
in Last Year in Marienbad by Resnais and Robbe-Grillet, the two big
theatre scenes are images in a m irror (and the entire Marienbad
hotel is a pure crystal, with its transparent side, its opaque side
and their exchange).13In contrast, Fellini’s 8 V2 is a seed-image, in
process of heing produced, which feeds on its setbacks (except
perhaps in the big scene with the telepath which introduces a
mirror-image). Wenders’s The State of Things is all the more in
seed-form because it aborts, becomes dispersed and can be
reflected only in the reasons which block it. Buster Keaton, who is
sometimes presented as a genius without reflection, is perhaps
the first along with Vertov to have introduced the film within the
film. In Sherlock Junior, this is in the form of a mirror-image; on
another occasion, in The Cameraman, it is in the form of a seed
which arrives direcdy via the cinema, even though manipulated
by a monkey or a reporter, and constitutes the film in process of
being made. Somedmes, on the other hand, in the m anner of
Gide’s Counterfeiters, the two themes or the two cases cross and join
up, becoming indistinguishable.14 In Godard’s Passion, the pic­
torial and musical tableaux vivants are in the process of being
produced; at the same time the female worker, the wife and the
boss are the mirror-image of what, nevertheless, reflects them
themselves. In Rivette, theatrical representation is a mirrorimage but, precisely because it is constantly failing, is the seed of
that which does not manage to come to completion or to be
reflected, hence the very odd role of the rehearsals of Pericles in
Paris Belongs to Us, or Phaedra in L ’amour fou. Yet another form
appears in Welles’s Immortal Story: the whole film was the
mirror-image of a legend staged again by the old man, but at the
same time stood on its own terms as the initial occasion which
would make the legend itself germinate and give it back to the
sea.15
   It was inevitable that the cinema, in the crises of the actionimage, went through melancholic Hegelian reflections on its own
death: having no more stories to tell, it would take itself as object
and would be able to tell only its own story (Wenders). But, in fact,
the work in the m irror and the work in the seed have always
accompanied art without ever exhausting it, because art found in
them a means of creation for certain special images. By the same

The crystals of time                                                77
token, the film within the film does not signal an end of history,
and is no more self-sufficient than is the flashback or the dream: it
is just a method of working, which must be justified from
elsewhere. In fact, it is a mode of the crystal-image. If this mode is
used, then it has to be grounded on considerations capable of
giving it a higher justification. It will be observed that, in ail the
arts, the work within the work has often been linked to the
consideration of a surveillance, an investigation, a revenge, a
conspiracy, or a plot. This was already true for the theatre in the
theatre of Hamlet, but also for the novel of Gide. We have seen
the importance that this theme of the conspiracy takes on in the
cinema, with the crisis of the action-image; and it is not only in
Rivette — an irresistible atmosphere of conspiracy spreads
through Last Year in Marienbad. Yet all this would only constitute a
perspective of very secondary importance if the cinema did not
have the most powerful reasons for giving it new and specific
depth. The cinema as art itself lives in a direct relation with a
permanent plot [complot], an international conspiracy which
conditions it from within, as the most intimate and most
indispensable enemy. This conspiracy is that of money; what
defines industrial art is not mechanical reproduction but the
internalized relation with money. T he only rejoinder to the harsh
law of cinema —a minute of image which costs a day of collective
work—is Fellini’s: ‘When there is no more money left, the film will
be finished.’ Money is the obverse of all the images that the
cinema shows and sets in place, so that films about money are
already, if implicitly, films within the film or about the film.16This
is the true ‘state of things’: it is not in a goal of cinema, as Wenders
says, but rather, as he shows, in a constitutive relation between the
film in process of being made and money as the totality of the film.
Wenders, in The State of Things, shows the deserted, run-down
hotel, and the film crew, each of whom returns to his solitude,
victim of a plot whose key is elsewhere; and this key is revealed in
the second half of the film as the other side, the mobile home of
the producer on the run who is going to get himself murdered,
causing the death of the film-maker, in such a way as to make
plain that there is not, and there never will be, equivalence or
equality in the mutual camera-money exchange.
   This is the old curse which undermines the cinema: time is
money. If it is true that movement maintains a set of exchanges or
an equivalence, a symmetry as an invariant, time is by nature the
conspiracy of unequal change or the impossibility of an

78                                                         Cinema 2
equivalence. It is in this sense that it is money: in Marx’s two
formulations, C-M-C is that of equivalence, but M-C-M is that of
impossible equivalence or tricked, dissymmetrical exchange.
Godard presented Passion as posing precisely this problem of
exchange. And if Wenders, as we saw in the case of his first films,
treated the camera as the general equivalent of all movement of
translation, he discovers in The State of Things the impossibility of a
camera-time equivalence, time being money or the circulation of
money. L’Herbier had said it all, in an astonishing and mocking
lecture: space and time becoming more and more expensive in
the modern world, art had to make itself international industrial
art, that is, cinema, in order to buy space and time as ‘imaginary
warrants of human capital’.17 This was not the explicit theme of
the masterpiece Money, but it was its implicit theme (and in a film
of the same title, inspired by Tolstoy, Bresson shows that money,
because it is of the order of time, makes impossible any reparation
for evil done, any equivalence or just retribution, except of course
through grace). In short, the cinema confronts its most internal
presupposition, money, and the movement-image makes way for the
time-image in one and the same operation. What the film within the
film expresses is this infernal circuit between the image and
money, this inflation which time puts into the exchange, this
‘overwhelming rise’. The film is movement, but the film within
the film is money, is time. The crystal-image thus receives the
principle which is its foundation: endlessly relaunching exchange
which is dissymmetrical, unequal and without equivalence, giving
image for money, giving time for images, converting time, the
transparent side, and money, the opaque side, like a spinning top
on its end. And the film will be finished when there is no more
money le ft. ..

                                  2
The crystal-image may well have many distinct elements, but its
irreducibility consists in the indivisible unity of an actual image
and ‘its’ virtual image. But what is this virtual image in coalescence
with the actual one? What is a mutual image? Bergson constantly
posed the question and sought the reply in time’s abyss. What is
actual is always a present. But then, precisely, the present changes
or passes. We can always say that it becomes past when it no longer

The crystals of time                                                 79
is, when a new present replaces it. But this is meaningless.18 It is
clearly necessary for it to pass on for the new present to arrive,
and it is clearly necessary for it to pass at the same time as it is
present, at the moment that it is the present. Thus the image has
to be present and past, still present and already past, at once and
at the same time. If it was not already past at the same time as
present, the present would never pass on. The past does not
follow the present that it is no longer, it coexists with the present it
was. The present is the actual image, and its contemporaneous
past is the virtual image, the image in a mirror. According to
Bergson, ‘paramnesia’ (the illusion of déjà-vu or already having
been there) simply makes this obvious point perceptible: there is a
recollection of the present, contemporaneous with the present
itself, as closely coupled as a role to an actor. ‘O ur actual existence,
then, whilst it is unrolled in time, duplicates itself along with a
virtual existence, a mirror-image. Every moment of our life
presents the two aspects, it is actual and virtual, perception on the
one side apd recollection on the o th e r. . . Whoever becomes
conscious of the continual duplicating of his present into percep­
tion dnd recollection . . . will compare himself to an actor playing
his part automatically, listening to himself and beholding himself
playing.’15'
   Bergson calls the virtual image ‘pure recollection’, the better to
distinguish it from mental images —recollection-images, dream
or dreaming —with which it might be readily confused. In fact,
the latter are certainly virtual images, but actualized or in the
course of actualization in consciousnesses or psychological states.
And they are necessarily actualized in relation to a new present, in
relation to a different present from the one that they have been:
hence these more or less broad circuits, evoking mental images in
accordance with the requirements of the new present which is
defined as later than the form er one, and which defines the
former one as earlier according to a law of chronological
succession (the recollection-image will thus be dated). In contrast,
the virtual image in the pure state is defined, not in accordance
with a new present in relation to which it would be (relatively)
past, but in accordance with the actual present of which it is the
past, absolutely and simultaneously: although it is specific it is
none the less part of ‘the past in general’, in the sense that it has
not yet received a date.21’ As pure virtuality, it does not have to be
actualized, since it is stricdy correlative with the actual image with
which it forms the smallest circuit which serves as base or point for

80                                                             Cinema 2
all the others. It is the virtual image which corresponds to a
particular actual image, instead of being actualized, of having to
be actualized in a different actual image. It is an actual-virtual
circuit on the spot, and not an actualization of the virtual in
accordance with a shifting actual. It is a crystal-image, and not an
organic image.
   The virtual image (pure recollection) is not a psychological
state or a consciousness: it exists outside of consciousness, in time,
and we should have no more difficulty in admitting the virtual
insistence of pure recollections in time than we do for the actual
existence of non-perceived objects in space. W hat causes our
mistake is that recollection-images, and even dream-images or
dreaming, haunt a consciousness which necessarily accords them
a capricious or intermittent allure, since they are actualized
according to the momentary needs of this consciousness. But, if
we ask where consciousness is going to look for these recollectionimages and these dream-images or this reverie that it evokes,
according to its states, we are led back to pure virtual images of
which the latter are only modes or degrees of actualization. Just as
we perceive things in the place where they are, and have to place
ourselves among things in order to perceive them, we go to look
for recollection in the place where it is, we have to place ourselves
with a leap into the past in general, into these purely virtual
images which have been constantly preserved through time. It is
in the past as it is in itself, as it is preserved in itself, that we go to
look for our dreams or our recollections, and not the opposite.21
It is only on this condition that the recollection-image will carry
the sign of the past which distinguishes it from a different image,
or the dream-image, the distinctive sign of a temporal perspec­
tive: they exhaust the sign in an ‘original virtuality’. This is why,
earlier, we were able to assimilate virtual images to mental images,
recollection-images, dream or dreaming: these were so many
incomplete solutions, but on the track of the right solution. The
more or less broad, always relative, circuits, between the present
and the past, refer back, on the one hand, to a small internal
circuit between a present and its own past, between an actual
image and its virtual image; on the other hand, they refer to
deeper and deeper circuits which are themselves virtual, which
each time mobilize the whole of the past, but in which the relative
circuits bathe or plunge to trace an actual shape and bring in their
provisional harvest.22 The crystal-image has these two aspects:
internal limit of all the relative circuits, but also outer-most,

The crystals of time                                                       81
variable and reshapable envelope, at the edges of the world,
beyond even moments of world. The litde crystalline seed and the
vast crystallizable universe: everything is included in the capacity
for expansion of the collection constituted by the seed and the
universe. Memories, dreams, even worlds are only apparent
relative circuits which depend on the variations of this Whole.
They are degrees or modes of actualization which are spread out
between these two extremes of the actual and the virtual: the
actual and its virtual on the small circuit, expanding virtualities in
the deep circuits. And it is from the inside that the small internal
circuit makes contact with the deep ones, directly, through the
merely relative circuits.
   What constitutes the crystal-image is the most fundamental
operation of time: since the past is constituted not after the
present that it was but at the same time, time has to split itself in
two at each moment as present and past, which differ from each
other in nature, or, what amounts to the same thing, it has to split
the present in two heterogeneous directions, one of which is
launched towards the future while the other falls into the past.2-1
Time has to split at the same time as it sets itself out or unrolls
itself: it splits in two dissymmetrical jets, one of which makes all
the present pass on, while the other preserves all the past. Time
consists of this split, and it is this, it is time, that we see in the crystal.
The crystal-image was not time, but we see time in the crystal. We
see in the crystal the perpetual foundation of time, nonchronological time, Cronos and not Chronos. This is the power­
ful, non-organie Life which grips the world. The visionary, the
seer, is the one who sees in the crystal, and what he sees is the
gushing of time as dividing in two, as splitting. Except, Bergson
adds, this splitting never goes right to the end. In fact the crystal
constantly exchanges the two distinct images which constitute it,
the actual image of the present which passes and the virtual image
of the past which is preserved: distinct and yet indiscernible, and
all the more indiscernible because distinct, because we do not
know which is one and which is the other. This is unequal
exchange, or the point of indiscernibility, the mutual image. The
crystal always lives at the limit, it is itself the ‘vanishing limit
between the immediate past which is already no longer and the
immediate future which is not y e t. . . mobile mirror which
endlessly reflects perception in recollection’. What we see in the
crystal is therefore a dividing in two that the crystal itself
constantly causes to turn on itself, that it prevents from reaching

82                                                           Cinema 2
completion, because it is a perpetual self-distinguishing, a distinc­
tion in the process of being produced; which always resumes the
distinct terms in itself, in order constantly to relaunch them. ‘The
putting into abyss [mise-en-abyme] does not redouble the unit, as an
externa] reflection might do; in so far as it is an internal
mirroring, it can only ever split it in two’, and subject it ‘to the
infinite relaunch of endlessly new splitting’.24 The crystal-image
is, then, the point of indiscernibility of the two distinct images, the
actual and the virtual, while what we see in the crystal is time itself,
a bit of time in the pure state, the very distinction between the two
images which keeps on reconstituting itself. So there will be
different states of the crystal, depending on the acts of its
formation and the figures of what we see in it. We analysed earlier
the elements of the crystal, but not the crystalline states; each of
these states we can now call crystal of time.2*
    Bergson’s major theses on time are as follows: the past coexists
with the present that it has been; the past is preserved in itself, as
past in general (non-chronological); at each moment time splits
itself into present and past, present that passes and past which is
preserved. Bergsonism has often been reduced to the following
idea: duration is subjective, and constitutes our internal life. And
it is true that Bergson had to express himself in this way, at least at
the outset. But, increasingly, he came to say something quite
different: the only subjectivity is time, non-chronological time
grasped in its foundation, and it is we who are internal to time, not
the other way round. That we are in time looks like a common­
place, yet it is the highest paradox. Time is not the interior in us,
but just the opposite, the interiority in which we are, in which we
move, live and change. Bergson is much closer to Kant than he
himself thinks: Kant defined time as the form of interiority, in the
sense that we are internal to time (but Bergson conceives this
form quite differendy from Kant). In the novel, it is Proust who
says that time is not internal to us, but that we are internal to time,
which divides itself in two, which loses itself and discovers itself in
itself, which makes the present pass and the past be preserved. In
the cinema, there are perhaps three films which show how we
inhabit time, how we move in it, in this form which carries us
away, picks us up and enlarges us: Dovzhenko’s Zvenigora,
Hitchock’s Vertigo and Resnais’Je t’aimeje t’airne. In Resnais’ film,
the opaque hyper-sphere is one of the most beautiful crystalimages, while what we see in the crystal is time itself, the gushing
forth of time. Subjectivity is never ours, it is time, that is, the soul

The crystals of time                                                83
or the spirit, the virtual. The actual is always objective, but the
virtual is subjective: it was initially the affect, that which we
experience in time; then time itself, pure virtuality which divides
i'tselt in two as aftector and alfected ,‘the affection ot selt~by self
as definition of time.                                               ~

                                  3
Let us suppose an ideal state which would be the perfect,
completed crystal. Ophuls’s images are perfect crystals. Their
facets are oblique mirrors, as in Madame de. . . And the mirrors
are not content with reflecting the actual image, but constitute the
prism, the lens where the split image constantly runs after itself to
connect up with itself, as on the circus-track in Lola Montez. On the
track or in the crystal, the imprisoned characters busde, acting
and acted on, a bit like Raymond Roussel’s heroes exercising their
prowess at the heart of a diamond or a glass cage, under an
iridescent light (The Tender Enemy). One can only just turn in the
crystal: hence the round of episodes, and also of colours (Lola
Montez), of waltzes and also of earrings (Madame de . ..), of the
master of ceremonies’ visions in the round in La ronde. Crystalline
perfection lets no outside subsist: there is no outside of the mirror
or the film set, but only an obverse where the characters who
disappear or die go, abandoned by life which thrusts itself back
into the film set. In House of Pleasure, the tearing-off of the old
dancer’s mask reveals no outside but an obverse which sends and
guides the busy doctor back to the ball.2fi And, even in his tender
and familiar asides, the pitiless M. Loyal in Lola Montez keeps on
thrusting the failing heroine back on the stage. If we consider the
relations between theatre and cinema in general, we no longer
find ourselves in the classical situation where the two arts are two
different ways of actualizing the same virtual image, but neither
do we find ourselves in the situation of a ‘montage of attraction’,
where a theatrical spectacle (or a circus, etc.), being filmed, itself
plays the role of a virtual image which would serve to extend the
actual images by succeeding them for a time, during a sequence.
The situation is quite different: the actual image and the virtual
image coexist and crystallize; they enter into a circuit which
brings us constantly back from one to the other; they form one
and the same ‘scene’ where the characters belong to the real and

84                                                         Cinema 2
yet play a role. In short, it is the whole of the real, life in its
entirety, which has become spectacle, in accordance with the
demands of a pure optical and sound percepdon. The scene,
then, is not restricted to providing a sequence but becomes the
cinematographic unity which replaces the shot or itself consti­
tutes a sequence shot. It is a properly cinematographic theatri­
cality, the ‘excess of theatricality’ that Bazin spoke of, and that
only cinema can give to theatre.
    Its origin would perhaps be Tod Browning’s masterpieces. At
any event, Ophiils’s monsters do not really need a monstrous
appearance. They pursue their round in frozen and iced images.
And what do we see in the perfect crystal? Time, but time which
has already rolled up, rounded itself, at the same time as it was
splitting. Lola Montez can include flashbacks: the film would be
enough to confirm, if it were necessary, the degree to which the
flashback is a secondary procedure whose value arises only from
serving a deeper move. For what counts is not the link between
the actual and miserable present (the circus) and the recollectionimage of former magnificent presents. The evocation is certainly
there; but what it reveals at a deeper level is the dividing in two of
time, which makes all the presents pass and makes them tend
towards the circus as if towards their future, but also preserves all
the pasts and puts them into the circus as so many virtual images
in pure recollections. Lola Montez herself experiences the vertigo
of this dividing in two when, drunk and feverish, she is about to
throw herself from the top of the marquee into the tiny net which
is waiting for her below: the whole scene is seen as in the lens of
the pen-holder dear to Raymond Roussel. The dividing in two,
the differentiation of the two images, actual and virtual, does not
go to the limit, because the resulting circuit repeatedly takes us
back from one kind to the other. There is only a vertigo, an
oscillation.
    In Renoir too, from The Little Match-Girl where the Christmas
tree appears adorned with crystals, automata and living beings,
objects and reflections enter into a circuit of coexistence and
exchange which constitutes a ‘theatricality in the pure state’. And
it is in The Golden Coach that this coexistence and exchange will be
taken to their highest point, with the two sides of the camera or
the image, the actual image and the virtual image. But what are
we to say when the image ceases to be flat or double-faced, and
depth of field adds a third side to it? It is depth of field, for
example in La règle du jeu, which ensures a nesting of frames, a

The crystals of time                                                85
waterfall of mirrors, a system of rhymes between masters and
valets, living beings and automata, theatre and reality, actual and
virtual. It is depth of field which substitutes the scene for the shot.
We will be all the more hesitant to give it the role intended by
Bazin, namely a pure function of reality. The function of depth is
rather to constitute the image in crystal, and to absorb the real
which thus passes as much into the virtual as into the actual.27
There is, however, a great difference between the crystals of
Renoir and those of Ophüls. In Renoir, the crystal is never pure
and perfect; it has a failing, a point of flight, a ‘flaw’. It is always
cracked. And this is what depth of field reveals: there is not simply
a rolling-up of a round in the crystal; something is going to slip
away in the background, in depth, through the third side or third
dimension, through the crack. This was already true of the
mirror in the flat image, as in The Golden Coach, but it was less
visible, whilst depth makes it clear that the crystal is there so
something can escape in it, in the background, through the
background. La règle du jeu produces a coexistence of the actual
image of men and the virtual image of beasts, the actual image of
living beings and the virtual image of automata, the actual image
of characters and the virtual image of their roles during the party,
the actual image of the masters m d their virtual image in the
servants, the actual image of the servants and their virtual image
in the masters. Everything is mirror-images, distributed in depth.
But depth of field always arranges a background in the circuit
through which something can flee: the crack. It is interesting that
a number of answers have been given to the question, who does
not play the rules of the game? Truffaut, for instance, says that it
is the airman. Yet the airman remains locked into the crystal,
prisoner of his role, and hides when the woman proposes that he
should escape with her. As Bamberger observed, the only
character who is out of line [hors règle], not allowed in the château
and yet belonging to it, neither outside nor inside, but always in
the background, is the gamekeeper, the only person who does not
have a double or reflecdon. Bursting in, despite the prohibition,
in pursuit of the poaching valet, mistakenly killing the airman, he
is the one who breaks the circuit, who shatters the cracked crystal
with rifle shots and causes its contents to escape.
   La règle du jeu is one of Renoir’s finest films, but it does not give
us the key to the others. For it is pessimistic, and proceeds by
violence. And it does violence first of all to Renoir’s complete idea.
This complete idea is that the crystal or the scene is not restricted

86                                                           Cinema 2
to putting into circuit the actual image and the virtual image, and
absorbing the real into a generalized theatre. W ithout recourse to
violence, and through the development of an experimentation,
something will come out of the crystal, a new Real will come out
beyond the actual and virtual. Everything happens as if the circuit
served to try out roles, as if roles were being tried in it until the
right one were found, the one with which we escape to enter a
clarified reality. In short, the circuit, the round, are not closed
because they are selective, and produce a winner each time.
Renoir has sometimes been criticized for his taste for the
makeshift and improvisation, both in his direction in general, and
in his directing of the actors. This is in fact a creative virtue, linked
to the substitution of the scene for the shot. According to Renoir,
theatre is inseparable —for both characters and actors —from the
enterprise of experimenting with and selecting roles, until you
find the one which goes beyond theatre and enters life.2H In his
pessimistic moments, Renoir is doubtful that there can be a
winner: in that case there are only the keeper’s shots which make
the crystal explode, as in La règle du jeu, or the turbulence of the
river swollen by the storm and stung by the rain in A Day in the
Country. But, following his temperament, Renoir bets on a win:
something takes shape inside the crystal which will succeed in
leaving through the crack and spreading freely. This was already
the case with Boudu, who rediscovers the thread of water when
he comes out of the intimate, closed-in theatre of the bookshop
where he has tried many roles. It will be the case with Harriet in
the grandiose film The River, where the children, sheltered in a
kind of crystal or Hindu pavilion, try roles, some of which take a
tragic turn, as a result of which the younger brother dies
tragically, but in which the girl will serve her apprenticeship, until
she finds in it the powerful will for life which becomes identified
with the river and joins it again on the outside. A film strangely
close to Lawrence. For Renoir, theatre is primary, but because life
 must emerge from it. Theatre is valuable only as a search for an
 art of living; this is what the disparate couple in Little Theatre
 learn. ‘Where then, does theatre finish and life begin?’ remains
 the question always asked by Renoir. We are born in a crystal, but
 the crystal retains only death, and life must come out of it, after
 trying itself out. Even as an adult, the teacher in Picnic on the Grass
 will experience this adventure. The wild dance at the end of
French Cancan is not a round, a flowing-back of life into the circuit,
 into the theatrical scene, as in Ophüls, but, on the contrary, a

The crystals of time                                                 87
gallop, a means by which theatre opens into life, pours out into
life, carrying Nini along in a troubled stream. At the end of The
Golden Coach, three characters will have found their living role,
while Camilla will remain in the crystal, to try still other roles in it,
one of which will perhaps make her discover the true Camilla.28
   This is why, although he fully shares the general taste of the
French school for water, Renoir makes such a special use of it.
There are, according to him, two states of water, the frozen water
of the glass pane, the flat mirror, or the deep crystal, and the fast,
flowing water (or the wind, which plays the same role in Picnic on
the Grass). Rather than being naturalism, this is much closer to
Maupassant, who often sees things through a pane, before
following their course on a river. In A Day in the Country it is
through the window that the two men observe the family arriving,
each of the two playing his role, one that of the cynic, the other
that of the scrupulous sentimentalist. But, when the action
develops on the river, the test of life causes the roles to be
dropped, and shows a good sort in the cynic, while the senti­
mental one is revealed as an unscrupulous seducer.
   What we see through the pane or in the crystal is time, in its
double movement of making presents pass, replacing one by the
next while going towards the future, but also of preserving all the
past, dropping it into an obscure depth. This dividing in two, this
differentiation, did not achieve completion in Ophiils because
time rolled itself up, and its two aspects relaunched themselves
 into the circuit whose poles they recharged while blocking up the
 future. Now, in contrast, the dividing in two can come to
completion, but precisely on condition that one of the two
 tendencies leaves the crystal, through the point of flight. From
 the indiscernibility of the actual and the virtual, a new distinction
 must emerge, like a new reality which was not pre-existent.
 Everything that has happened falls back into the crystal and stays
 there: this is all the frozen, fixed, finished-with and over-
 conforming roles that the characters have tried in turn, dead
 roles or roles of death, the macabre dance of recollections that
 Bergson speaks of, as in the château in La règle du jeu or the
 fortress in Grand Illusion. Some of these roles may be heroic, like
 the two enemy officers in pursuit of rites which are already
 outmoded, or charming, like the test of first love: they are none
 the less condemned, because already destined for recollection.
 And yet the trying out of roles is indispensable. It is indispensable
 so that the other tendency, that of presents which pass and are

88                                                             Cinema 2
replaced, emerges from the scene and launches itself towards a
future, creates this future as a bursting forth of life. The two
fugitives will be saved by the sacrifice of the other. Harriet will be
saved because she will be able to renounce the role of her first
love. Saved from the waters, Boudu will also be saved by the
waters, abandoning the successive roles granted him by the too
intimate dreams of the bookshop and his wife. One leaves the
theatre to get to life, but one leaves it imperceptibly, on the thread
of the stream, that is, of time. It is by leaving it that time gives itself
a future. Hence the importance of the question: where does life
begin? Time in the crystal is differentiated into two movements,
but one of them takes charge of the future and freedom,
provided that it leaves the crystal. Then the real will be created; at
the same time as it escapes the eternal referral back of the actual
and the virtual, the present and the past. When Sartre criticized
Welles (and Citizen Kane) for having reconstituted time on the
basis of the past, instead of understanding it in terms of a
dimension of the future, he was perhaps unaware that the
film-maker closest to his wishes was Renoir. It was Renoir who
had a lively awareness of the identity of freedom with a collective
or individual future, with a leap towards the future, an opening
of the future. This is even Renoir’s political consciousness, the
way in which he conceives the French Revolution or the Popular
Front.
   There is perhaps yet a third state: the crystal caught in its
formation and growth, related to the ‘seeds’ which make it up. In
fact there is never a completed crystal; each crystal is infinite by
right, in the process of being made, and is made with a seed which
incorporates the environment and forces it to crystallize. The
question is no longer that of knowing what comes out of the
crystal and how, but, on the contrary, how to get into it. For each
entrance is itself a crystalline seed, a component element. We
recognize the method that will be increasingly adopted by Fellini.
He began with films of wandering, which relaxed the sensorymotor connections, and made pure sound-and-optical images
rise up —photo-novel, investigation-photo, music-hall, party. But
the concerns were still those of escaping, leaving and going away.
He became increasingly concerned with entering into a new
element, and multiplying the entrances. There are geographical
entrances, psychic ones, historical, archaelogical, etc: all the
entrances into Rome, or into the world of clowns. Sometimes an
entrance is explicitly double; thus the crossing of the Rubicon in

The crystals of time                                             89
Fellini's Roma is a historical evocation, but a comical one, through
the intermediary of a school memory. One could, for example,
make a count of these entrances as so many types of image in 8 V2 :
the childhood recollection, the nightmare, the distraction, the
dreaming, the fantasy, the feeling of already having been there.3"
Hence the honeycomb-presentation, the cubicled images, the
huts, niches, cabins and windows which mark Satyricon,Juliet of the
Spirits, and City of Women. Two things happen at once. On the one
hand, purely optical and sound-images crystallize: they attract
their contents, make them crystallize and compose them from an
actual image and its virtual image, its mirror-image. These are so
many seeds or entrances: in Fellini, numbers and amusements
have replaced the scene, and made the depth of field redundant.
But, 011 the other hand, by entering into coalescence the images
constitute one and the same crystal in the course of infinite
growth. For the crystal as a whole is only the ordered set of its
seeds or the transversal of all its entrances.
   Fellini has fully grasped the economic principle which says that
only admission [entrée] pays. The only unity of Rome is that of the
spectacle which connects all its entrances. The spectacle becomes
universal, and keeps on growing, precisely because it has no
object other than entrances into the spectacle, which are so many
seeds in this respect. Amengual has given a profound definition
of this originality of spectacle in Fellini, with no distinction
between watching and watched, without spectators, without exit,
without wings or stage: less a theatre than a kind of giant Luna
Park, where movement, which has become movement of world,
makes us pass from one shop-window to another, from one
entrance to another through all the cubicles.31 Thus, we can see
from this the difference between Fellini and Renoir or Ophiils:
Fellini’s crystal does not include any crack through which we
could, we should, leave to reach life; but neither has it the
perfection of an established and cut crystal which would hold life
to freeze it. It is a crystal which is always in the process of
formation, expansion, which makes everything it touches crystall­
ize, and to which its seeds give a capacity for indefinite growth. It
is life as spectacle, and yet in its spontaneity.
   Does this mean that all entrances are equal? Yes, certainly, in so
far as they are seeds. O f course seeds maintain the distinction that
there was between the types of sound and optical images that they
make crystallize — perceptions, recollections, dreams, fanta­
sies . . . But these distinctions become indiscernible, because

90                                                          Cinema 2
there is a homogeneity of seed and crystal, the whole of the latter
being no more than a greater seed in the process of growth. But
other differences are introduced, in so far as the crystal is an
ordered set: certain seeds abort and others are successful; certain
entrances open while others close again, as in the frescoes of
Rome which turn blank on being looked at and become opaque. It
is not possible to predict this, even if one has premonitions;
nevertheless, a selection is made (although in a completely
different way from in Renoir). Let us take the entrances or
successive seeds in one of Fellini’s masterpieces, The Clowns. The
first, as often in Fellini, is the childhood memory; but it will
crystallize with impressions of nightmare and poverty (the
imbecile clown). The second entrance is the historical and
sociological investigation with an interview of clowns: the clowns
and the filmed locations enter into resonance with the crew in
process of filming, and form another impasse. The third, the
worst, is more archaeological, in the television archives. At least, it
persuades us, at this point in our classification, that the imaginary
counts for more than the archive (only the imaginary can develop
the seed). Then the fourth entrance is kinesthic: but it is not a
movement-image which represents a circus spectacle, it is a
mirror-image which represents a movement of world, a de­
personalized movement, and reflects the death of the circus in the
death of the clown. It is the hallucinatory perception of the
clown’s death, the funeral gallop (‘faster, faster’) where the
funeral carriage is transformed into a champagne bottle from
which the clown pops. And this fourth entrance is in turn
replugged, in the emptiness and silence, like at the end of a party.
But an old clown, left behind at the fourth entrance (he was out of
breath, the movement was going too fast), is going to open a fifth,
purely of sound and music: with his trum pet he invoked his
vanished companion, and the other trum pet replied. Across
death it was like a ‘beginning of world’, a sound-crystal, the two
trumpets each alone, and yet each a mirror, an echo . . ,12
   The organization of the crystal is bipolar, or rather two-sided.
In surrounding the seed, it sometimes passes on an acceleration, a
hurrying, sometimes a hopping or fragmenting, which will
constitute the opaque side of the crystal; and sometimes it gives it
a limpidity which is like the test of the eternal. On one side would
be written ‘Saved!’, and on the other ‘Doomed!’, in an apocalyptic
landscape like the desert in Satyricon,M But we cannot tell in
advance; an opaque side may even become limpid through

The crystals of time                                                  91
imperceptible transformation, and a limpid side be revealed as
deceptive and become dark like Claudia in 8 'h. Will everything be
saved, as the final round in 8 V2 leads us to believe, carrying along
all the seeds around the white child? Will everything be lost, as in
the mechancial starts and funerary fragmentations which lead to
the woman-automaton in Casanova? It is never wholly one or
wholly the other, and the opaque side of the crystal, for instance,
the ship of death on the sea of plastic in Amarcord, also points to
the other side^which extricates itself and does not die, whilst the
limpid side, like the rocket of the future in 8 '/2 , waits for the seeds
to come out of their honeycomb or their funerary haste to carry
them off. In fact, the selection is so complex, and the imbrication
so tight, that Fellini created a word, something like ‘procadence’,
to indicate both the inexorable course of decadence and the
possibility of freshness or creation which must accompany it (it is
in this sense that he calls himself fully an ‘accomplice’ of
decadence and ruination).
    What we see in the crystal is always the bursting forth of life, of
time, in its dividing in two or differentiadon. However, in
opposition to Renoir, not only does nothing leave the crystal —
since it keeps on and on growing —but it is as if the signs of
selection are reversed. In Fellini, it is the present, the parade of
presents that pass, which constitutes the danse macabre. They run,
but to the tomb, not towards the future. Fellini is the author who
was able to produce the most prodigious galleries of monsters: a
tracking shot surveys them, stopping at one or another, but they
are always caught in the present, birds of prey disturbed by the
camera, diving into it for a moment. Salvation can come only
from the other side, from the side of the pasts which are
preserved: there, a fixed shot isolates a character, takes him out of
the line, and gives him, even if it is only for an instant, a chance
which is in itself eternal, a virtuality which will be valid for ever
even if it is not actualized. It is not that Fellini has a particular taste
for memory and recollection-images: there is no cult of former
 presents in his work. It is in fact like in Péguy, where the
 horizontal succession of presents which pass outlines a route to
death, whilst for every present there corresponds a vertical line
which unites it at a deep level with its own past, as well as to the
 past of the other presents, constituting between them all one and
 the same coexistence, one and the same contemporaneity, the
 ‘in-ternaF \intemel\ rather than the eternal. It is not in the
 recollection-image but in pure recollection that we remain

92                                                         Cinema 2
contemporary with the child that we were as the believer feels
himself contemporary with Christ. The child in us, says Fellini, is
contemporary with the adult, the old man and the adolescent.
Thus it is that the past which is preserved takes on all the virtues
of beginning and beginning again: it is what holds in its depths or
in its sides the surge of the new reality, the bursting forth of life.
One of the finest images in Amarcord shows the gToup of
schoolboys, the timid one, the prankster, the dreamer, the good
pupil, etc., who meet in front of the big hotel as soon as the season
is over; and, while the snow crystals fall, each on his own and yet
all of them together sketch a clumsy dance-step or an imitation of
a musical instrument, one going in a straight line, another tracing
circles, another turning round on the sp o t. . . There is in this
image a science of precisely measured distance which separates
each of them from the others, and yet an organization which
connects them. They lodge themselves in a depth which is no
longer that of memory, but that of a coexistence where we
become their contemporaries, as they become the contempora­
ries of all the ‘seasons’ past and to come. The two aspects, the
present that passes and goes to death, the past which is preserved
and retains the seed of life, repeatedly interfere and cut into each
other. It is the line of those taking the waters in a nightmare in
8 V2 , but interrupted by the dream-image of the luminous girl, the
white nurse who gives out the tumblers. Whatever the speed or
the slowness, the line, the tracking shot is a race, a cavalcade, a
gallop. But safety comes from a ritornello which is placed or
unrolls round a face, and extracts it from the line. La Strada was
already the quest for the moment when the wandering ritornello
could settle on the man who is finally at peace. And on whom will
the ritornello place itself, calming the anxiety in 8 V2, on Claudia,
on the wife, or even on the mistress, or only on the white child, the
internal [internet] or contemporary of all the pasts, who saves
everything that can be saved?
   The crystal-image is as much a matter of sound as it is opdcal,
and Félix Guattari was right to define the crystal of time as being a
‘ritornello’ par excellence.34 Or, perhaps, the melodic ritornello is
only a musical component which contrasts and is mixed with
another, rhythmic component: the gallop. The horse and the
bird would be two great figures, one of which carries away and
speeds up the other, but the other of which is reborn from itself
up to the final destruction or extinction (in many dances, an
accelerated gallop comes as the conclusion of figures of rounds).

The crystals of time                                               93
The gallop and the ritornello are what we hear in the crystal, as
the two dimensions of musical time, the one being the hastening
of the presents which are passing, the other the raising or falling
back of pasts which are preserved. Now, if we consider the
problem of a specificity of cinema music, it seems to us that this
specificity cannot simply be defined by a dialectic of the sound
and the optical which would enter into a new synthesis (Eisen­
stein, Adorno). Cinema music, through itself, tends towards
releasing the ritornello and the gallop as two pure and selfsufficient elements, while many other components necessarily
intervene in music in general, except in exceptional cases such as
the Bolero. This is already true in the Western, where the little
melodic phrase comes as the interruption of galloping rhythms
(Blowing Wild by Zinnemann and Tiomkin); it is even more
obvious in musical comedy, where .the rhythmic stepping and
walking, which is sometimes military even for the girls, come up
against the melodic song. But the two elements are also combined
as in Daybreak by Carné and Jaubert, where the basses and the
percussion give the rhythm while the little flute launches the
melody. In Gremillon, one of the cinema’s most musician-like
authors, the gallop of the farandoles returns us back to the repeat
of the ritornellos, the two separated or brought together (RolandManuel). It is these tendencies that achieve perfect expression
when the cinematographic image becomes crystal-image. In
Ophiils, the two elements fuse in the identification of the round
with the gallop, while in Renoir and Fellini they are distinct, one
of them taking on to itself the force of life, the o.ther the power of
death. But, for Renoir, the force of life is on the side of the
presents which are launched towards the future, on the side of
the gallop, whether this is that of the French cancan or the
Marseillaise, whilst the ritornello has the melancholy of that
which is already falling back into the past. For Fellini, it seems to
be the opposite: the gallop accompanies the world which runs to
its end, the earthquake, the incredible entropy, the hearse, but
the ritornello immortalizes a beginning of world and removes it
from passing time. T he galloping of the circus clowns31’* and the
ritornello of the ordinary clowns. Again things are never that
simple, and there is something unascribable in the distinction of
ritornellos from gallops. It is this that makes the collaboration
between Fellini and the musician Nino Rota extraordinary. At the
end of Orchestra Rehearsals, we first hear the purest gallop from
the violins, but a ritornello rises imperceptibly to succeed it, until

94                                                           Cinema 2
the two intertwine with one another more and more closely,
throttling themselves like wrestlers, lost-saved, Iost-saved . . .T he
two musical movements become the object of the film, and time
itself becomes a thing of sound.
   The final state to be considered would be the crystal in the
process of decomposition. The work of Visconti shows this. This
work reached its perfection when Visconti was able both to
distinguish and put into play, in varying combinations, four
fundamental elements which haunted him. In the first place, the
aristocratic world of the rich, the aristocratic former-rich: this is
what is crystalline, but like a synthetic crystal, because it is outside
history and nature, outside divine creation. The abbot in The
Leopard will explain it: we do not understand these rich, because
they have created a world to themselves, whose laws we are unable
to grasp, and where what seems to us secondary or even
inopportune takes on an extraordinary urgency and importance;
their motives always escape us like rites whose religion is not
known (as in the old prince who gets his country back and orders a
picnic). This world is not that of the creative artist, even though
Death in Venice presents a musician, but precisely one whose work
has been too intellectual and cerebral. Nor is it a world of simple
art enthusiasts. Rather, they are surrounded by art; they are
profoundly ‘knowledgeable about’ art both as works and as life,
but it is this knowledge which separates them from life and
creation, as in the teacher in Conversation Piece. They demand
freedom, but a freedom which they enjoy like an empty privilege
which could come to them from elsewhere, from the forebears
from whom they are descended, and from the art by which they
are surrounded. Ludwig II wants ‘to prove his freedom’, whilst
the true creator, Wagner, is of another race, much more prosaic
and less abstract in reality. Ludwig II wants roles and more roles,
like those that he tears from the exhausted actor. The king orders
his deserted castles, as the prince his picnic, in a movement which
empties art and life of all interiority. Visconti’s genius culminates
in the great scenes or ‘compositions’, often in red and gold: opera
 in Senso, reception rooms in The Leopard, Munich castle in Ludwig,
grand hotel rooms in Venice and music-room in The Innocent:
crystalline images of an aristocratic world. But, in the second
 place, these crystalline environments are inseparable from a
 process of decomposition which eats away at them from within,
 and makes them dark and opaque: the rotting of Ludwig II’s
 teeth, family rot which takes over the teacher in Conversation Piece,

The crystals of time                                               95
the debasement of Ludwig II’s love-affairs; and incest every­
where as in the Bavarian family, the return of Sandra, the
abomination of The Damned; everywhere the thirst for m urder
and suicide, or the need for forgetting and death, as the old
prince says on behalf of the whole of Sicily. It is not just that these
aristocrats are on the brink of being ruined; the approaching ruin
is only a consequence. For it is a vanished past, but one which
survives in the artificial crystal, which is waiting for them,
absorbing them and snapping them up, taking away all their
power at the same time as they become lodged in it. Thus the
famous tracking shot with which Sandra opens: this is not
displacement in space but sinking into time without exit. Vis­
conti’s great compositions have a saturation which determines
their darkening. Everything becomes confused, to the point of
indiscernibility of the two women in The Innocent. In Ludwig, in
The Damned, the crystal is inseparable from a process of making
opaque which now makes trium phant the bluish, violet and
sepulchral shades, those of the moon as twilight of the gods or lost
kingdom of heroes (the sun-moon movement thus has a com­
pletely different value than in German expressionism, and
especially in the French school).
   The third element in Visconti is history. Because, of course, it
doubles decomposition, accelerates or even explains it: wars,
assumption of power by new forces, the rise of the new rich, who
are not interested in penetrating the secret laws of the old world,
but aim to make it disappear. However, history is not identical
with the internal decomposition of the crystal; it is an autono­
mous factor which stands on its own, and to which Visconti
sometimes dedicates marvellous images and sometimes grants a
presence which is all the more intense for being elliptical and
out-of-field. In Ludwig, very little history will be seen; we know
about the horrors of war and Prussia’s assumption of power only
indirectly, all the more so, perhaps, because Ludwig II wants to
know nothing about it. History growls at the door. In Senso, in
contrast, history is present, with the Italian movement, the
famous battle and the abrupt elimination of Garibaldi’s sup­
porters; or, in The Damned, with the rise of Hitler, the organiz­
ation of the SS, and the exterminations of the SA. But, present or
out-of-field, history is never scenery. It is caught obliquely in a
low-angled perspective in a rising or setting ray, a kind of laser
which comes and cuts into the crystal, disorganizes its substance,
hastens its darkening and disperses its sides, under a pressure

96                                                           Cinema 2
that is all the more powerful for being external, like the plague in
Venice, or the silent arrival of the SS at dawn . . .
   And then there is the fourth element, the most important in
Visconti, because it ensures the unity and circulation of the
others. This is the idea, or rather the revelation, that something
arrives too late. Caught in time, this could perhaps have avoided
the natural decomposition and historical dismanding of the
crystal-image. But it is history, and nature itself, the structure of
the crystal, which make it impossible for this to arrive in time.
Already in Senso, the distraught lover cried ‘Too late, too late’, too
late in relation to the history that divides us, but also because of
our nature, as rotten in you as in me. The prince, in The Leopard,
hears the ‘too late’ which spreads through the whole of Sicily: the
island, whose sea Visconti never shows, is so completely
embedded in the past of its nature and history that even the new
regime will be powerless to do anything for it. ‘Too late’ will
constantly be the rhythm of the images in Ludwig, because it is his
fate. This something that comes too late is always the perceptual
and sensual revelation of a unity of nature and man. Thus it is not
a simple lack; it is the mode of being of this grandiose revelation.
The ‘too-late’ is not an accident that takes place in time but a
dimension of time itself. As a dimension of time, it is, through the
crystal, the one which is opposed to the static dimension of the
past as this survives and weighs in the interior of the crystal. It is a
sublime clarity which is opposed to the opaque, but it has the
property of arriving too late, dynamically. As perceptible revel­
ation, the too-late is a matter of unity of nature and man, as world
or milieu. But, as sensual revelation, the unity becomes personal.
Thus the shattering revelation of the musician in Death in Venice,
when through the young boy he has a vision of what has been
lacking in his work: sensual beauty. It is the unbearable revelation
of the teacher in Conversation Piece, when he discovers a petty
criminal in the young man, his lover in nature and his son in
culture. Already in Obsession, Visconti’s first film, the possibility of
homosexuality arose as the chance of salvation, of escaping from
a stifling past, but too late. However, let us not think that
homosexuality is Visconti’s obsession. Amongst the finest of the
The Leopard's images is the one where the old prince, having given
approval for the love-match between his nephew and the
daughter of the nouveau riche, to save what can be saved, has a
revelation in a dance with the girl: their glances embrace; they are
for each other and at each other, while the nephew is pushed into

The crystals of time                                                     97
the background, himself fascinated and nullified by the grandeur
of this couple, but it is too late for the old man and the girl alike.
   Visconti is not in control of the four elements right from the
beginning of his work: often they are still difficult to distinguish,
or encroach on each other. But Visconti is searching and has a
foreboding. It has often been observed that the fishermen in The
Earth Trembles present a slowness, a hieradc quality which was the
sign of a natural aristocracy, in contrast to the nouveavx riches;
and, if the fishermen’s attempt fails, it is not just because of the
wholesalers, but because of the weight of an archaic past which
ensures that their project is too late.36 Rocco himself is not just a
‘saint’; he is an aristocrat by nature, in his family of poor peasants:
but too late to come back to the village, because the city is already
totally corrupt, because everything has become opaque and
because history has already brought change to the village . .. But
it seems to us that it is in The Leopard that Visconti achieves
complete control, as it were the harmony of his four elements.
The searing too-late becomes as intense as the ‘Nevermore’ of
Edgar Allan Poe; it also explains the direction Visconti would
have been able to take in translating Proust.37And Visconti’s pleas
cannot be reduced to his apparent aristocratic pessimism: the
work of art will be made from this plea, as with the pain and
suffering from which we make a statue. The too-late conditions
the work of art, and conditions its success, since the perceptible
and sensual unity of nature and man is the essence of art par
excellence, in so far as it is characteristic of it to arrive too late in all
other respects except precisely this one: time regained. As
Baroncelli put it, the Beautiful truly becomes a dimension in
 Visconti; it ‘plays the role of the fourth dimension’.38

5     Peaks of present and sheets of
      past: fourth commentary on
      Bergson

                                   i

The crystal reveals a direct time-image, and no longer an indirect
image of time deriving from movement. It does not abstract time;
it does better: it reverses its subordination in relation to move­
ment. The crystal is like a ratio cognoscendi of time, while time,
conversely, is ratio essendi.'* What the crystal reveals or makes
visible is the hidden ground of time, that is, its differentiation into
two flows, that of presents which pass and that of pasts which are
preserved. Time simultaneously makes the present pass and
preserves the past in itself. There are, therefore, already, two
possible time-images, one grounded in the past, the other in the
present. Each is complex and is valid for time as a whole.
   We have seen that Bergson gave an assured status to the first
image. This is the model of the inverse cone. The past is not to be
confused with the mental existence of recollection-images which
actualize it in us. It is preserved in time: it is the virtual element
into which we penetrate to look for the ‘pure recollection’ which
will become actual in a ‘recollection-image’. The latter would have
no trace of the past if we had not been to look for its seed in the
past. It is the same as with perception: just as we perceive things
where they are present, in space, we remember where they have
passed, in time, and we go out of ourselves just as much in each
case. Memory is not in us; it is we who move in a Being-memory, a
world-memory. In short, the past appears as the most general
form of an already-there, a pre-existence in general, which our
recollections presuppose, even our first recollection if there was
one, and which our perceptions, even the first, make use of. From
this point of view the present itself exists only as an infinitely
contracted past which is constituted at the extreme point of the
already-there. The present would not pass on without this
condition. It would not pass on if it was not the most contracted
degree of the past. In fact it is striking that the successive is not the
past but the present which is passing. The past appears, in

Peaks of present and sheets of past                                  99
 contrast, as the coexistence of circles which are more or less
 dilated or contracted, each one of which contains everything at
 the same time and the present of which is the extreme limit (the
 smallest circuit that contains all the past). Between the past as
 pre-existence in general and the present as infinitely contracted
 past there are, therefore, all the circles of the past constituting so
 many stretched or shrunk regions, strata, and sheets: each region
 with its own characteristics, its ‘tones’, its ‘aspects’, its ‘singula­
 rities’, its ‘shining points’ and its ‘dominant’ themes. Depending
 on the nature of the recollection that we are looking for, we have
 to jum p into a particular circle. It is true that these regions (my
 childhood, my adolescence, my adult life, etc.), appear to succeed
 each other. But they succeed each other only from the point of
 view of form er presents which marked the limit of each of them.
They coexist, in contrast, from the point of view of the actual
 present which each time represents their common limit or the
 most contracted of them. What Fellini says is Bergsonian: ‘We are
 constructed in memory; we are simultaneously childhood, adole­
 scence, old age and maturity.’ What happens when we search for
 a recollection? We have to put ourselves into the past in general,
 then we have to choose between the regions: in which one do we
 think that the recollection is hidden, huddled up waiung for us
 and evading us? (It is a friend from childhood or youth, from
 school or the arm y.. . ?) We have to jum p into a chosen region,
 even if we have to return to the present in order to make another
jum p, if the recollection sought for gives no response and does
 not realize itself in a recollection-image. These are the paradoxi­
 cal characteristics of a non-chronological time: the pre-existence
 of a past in general; the coexistence of all the sheets of past; and
 the existence of a most contracted degree.2 It is a conception that
 can be found in the first great film of a cinema of time, Welles’s
 Citizen Kane.
    And, with Bergson, this time-image extends naturally into a
 language-image, and a thought-image. What the past is to time,
 sense is to language and idea to thought. Sense as past of language
 is the form of its pre-existence, that which we place ourselves in at
 once in order to understand images of sentences, to distinguish
 the images of words and even phonemes that we hear. It is
 therefore organized in coexisting circles, sheets, or regions,
 between which we choose according to actual auditory signs
 which are grasped in a confused way. Similarly, we place
 ourselves initially in the idea; we jum p into one of its circles in

100                                                          Cinema 2
order to form images which correspond to the actual quest. Thus
chronosigns are continually extended into Iectosigns and noosigns.
    But, to approach it in a different way, can the present in turn
stand for the whole of time? Yes, perhaps, if we manage to
separate it from its own actual quality, in the same way that we
distinguish the past from the recollection-image which actualized
it. If the present is actually distinguishable from the future and
the past, it is because it is presence of something, which precisely
stops being present when it is replaced by something else. It is in
relation to the present of something else that the past and future
are said of a thing. We are, then, passing along different events, in
accordance with an explicit time or a form of succession which
entails that a variety of things fill the present one after another. It
is quite different if we are established inside one single event; if
we plunge into an event that is in preparation, arrives and is over;
if for a longitudinal, pragmatic view we substitute a vision which is
purely optical, vertical, or, rather, one in depth. The event is no
longer confused with the space which serves as its place, nor with
the actual present which is passing: ‘the tíme of the event comes to
an end before the event does, so the event will start again at
another time .. . the whole event is as it were in the time where
nothing happens’, and it is in empty time that we anticipate
recollection, break up what is actual and locate the recollection
once it is formed.3 On this occasion there is no longer a future,
present and past in succession, in accordance with the explicit
passage of presents which we make out. Adopting St Augustine’s
fine formulation, there is a present of the future, a present of the
present and a present of the.past, all implicated in the event, rolled up
in the event, and thus simultaneous and inexplicable. From affect
to time: a time is revealed inside the event, which is made from the
simultaneity of these three implicated presents, from these
de-actualized peaks of present. It is the possibility of treating the
world or life, or simply a life or an episode, as one single event
 which provides the basis for the implication of presents. An
 accident is about to happen, it happens, it has happened; but
 equally it is at the same time that it will take place, has already
 taken place and is in the process of taking place; so that, before
 taking place, it has not taken place, and, taking place, will not take
 place . .. etc. This is the paradox of Josephine the mouse in
 Kafka: is she singing, did she sing, will she sing, or none of these,
 even though it all produces inexplicable differences in the

Peaks of present and sheets of past                                   101
collective present of mice?4 At the same time someone no longer
has the key (that is, used to have it), still has it (had not lost it), and
finds it (that is, will have it and did not have it). Two people know
each other, but already knew each other and do not yet know each
other. Betrayal happens, it never happened, and yet has hap­
pened and will happen, sometimes one betraying the other and
sometimes the other betraying the first —all at the same time. We
find ourselves here in a direct time-image of a different kind from
the previous one: no longer the coexistence of sheets of past, but
the simultaneity of peaks of present. We therefore have two kinds
of chronosigns: the first are aspects (regions, layers), the second
accents (peaks of view [pointes de vue]).
   This second type of time-image is to be found in Robbe-Grillet,
in a kind of Augustinianism. In his work there is never a succes­
sion of passing presents, but a simultaneity of a present of past, a
present of present and a present of future, which make time
frightening and inexplicable. The encounter in Last Year in Marienbad, the accident in L ’immortelle, the key in Trans-Europe
Express, the betrayal in The Man Who Lies: the three implicated
presents are constantly revived, contradicted, obliterated, substi­
tuted, re-created, fork and return. This is a powerful time-image.
This does not mean to say, however, that it suppresses all nar­
ration. But, much more importantly, it gives narration a new
value, because it abstracts it from all successive action, as far as it
replaces the movement-image with a genuine time-image. Thus
narration will consist of the distribution of different presents to
different characters, so that each forms a combination that is
plausible and possible in itself, but where all of them together are
‘incompossible’, and where the inexplicable is thereby maintained
and created. In Last Year. . ., it is X who knew A (so A does not
remember or is lying), and it is A who does not know X (so X is
mistaken or playing a trick on her). Ultimately, the three char­
acters correspond to the three different presents, but in such a
way as to ‘complicate’ the inexplicable instead of throwing light on
it; in such a way as to bring about its existence instead of suppress­
ing it: what X lives in a present of past, A lives in a present of
future, so that the difference exudes or assumes a present of
present (the third, the husband), all implicated in each other. The
repetition distributes its variations on the three presents. In The
Man Who Lies, the two characters are not simply the same: their
difference arises only in making the betrayal inexplicable, be­
cause this is attributed differently, but simultaneously, to each of

102                                                        Cinema 2
them as identical to the other. In Le jeu avec lefeu the kidnapping
of the girl has to be the means of warding it off but equally the
means of warding it off must be the kidnapping itself, so that she
has never been kidnapped at the moment when she is and will be,
and kidnaps herself at the moment when she has not been.
However, this new mode of narration still remains human, even
though it constitutes a lofty form of non-sense. It does not yet tell
us the essential point. The essential point rather appears if we
think of an earthly event which is assumed to be transmitted to
different planets, one of which would receive it at the same time
(at the speed of light), but the second more quickly, and the third
less quickly, hence before it happened and after. The latter would
not yet have received it, the second would already have received
it, the first would be receiving it, in three simultaneous presents
bound into the same universe. This would be a sidereal time, a
system of relativity, where the characters would be not so much
human as planetary, and the accents not so much subjective as
astronomical, in a plurality of worlds constituting the universe.5 It
would be a pluralist cosmology, where there are not only
different worlds (as in Minnelli), but where one and the same
event is played out in these different worlds, in incompatible
versions.
    Subjecting the image to a power of repetition-variation was
already Bunuel’s contribution, and a way of setting time free, of
reversing its subordination to movement. Although we have seen
that in most of Bunuel’s work time remained a cyclical time,
where sometimes forgetfulness (The Devil and the Flesh), some­
times exact repetition (The Exterminating Angel), marked the end
of one cycle and the possible beginning of another, in a cosmos
which was still unique. Influence, then, perhaps reversed in
 Bunuel’s last period, where he adapts an inspiration which has
 come from Robbe-Grillet for his own ends. It has been noted that
 the regime of dream or fantasy was changing in this last period.fi*
 But is is less a question of a state of the imaginary than of a
 deepening of the problem of time. In Belle de jour, the husband’s
 final paralysis does and does not take place (he suddenly gets up
 to talk about holidays with his wife); The Discreet Charm of the
Bourgeoisie shows less a cycle of interrupted meals than different
 versions of the same meal in irreducible modes and worlds. In The
 Phantom of Liberty, the postcards are truly pornographic, even
 though they represent only monuments stripped of all ambi­
 guity; and the little girl is lost, even though she has never stopped

Peaks of present and sheets of past                              103
being there and will be found again. And in That Obscure Object of
Desire there blossoms one of Buñuel’s finest inventions: instead of
having one character play different roles, casting two characters,
and two actresses, as one person. It is as if Buñuel’s naturalist
cosmology, based on the cycle and the succession of cycles, gives
way to a plurality of simultaneous worlds; to a simultaneity of
presents in different worlds. These are not subjective (imaginary)
points of view in one and the same world, but one and the same
event in different objective worlds, all implicated in the event,
inexplicable universe. Buñuel achieves here a direct time-image
which was previously impossible for him because of his naturalist
and cyclical point of view.
   Still more instructive is the confrontation between RobbeGrillet and Resnais in Last. Year in Marienbad. What seems
extraordinary in this collaboration is that two authors (for
Robbe-Grillet was not just scriptwriter) produced so coherent a
work while approaching it in such different and almost opposite
ways. They perhaps reveal in this way the truth about all real
collaboration, where the work is not simply understood but
constructed according to quite different creative procedures
which marry to make a success that is repeatable but each time
unique. This confrontation between Resnais and Robbe-Grillet is
complex, blurred by their extremely amicable statements, and
may be considered on three different levels. First, there is a level
o f‘modern’ cinema, marked by the crises of the action-image. Last
Year. . . was itself an important point in this crisis: the failure of
sensory-motor models, the wandering of characters, the rise of
clichés and postcards were a constant inspiration in RobbeGrillet’s work. And in his work the bonds of the captive woman do
not just have erotic and sadistic value, they are the simplest way to
stop the movement.7 But in Resnais too, wanderings, immobilizings, petrifications and repetitions are constant evidence of a
general dissolution of the action-image. The second level is that
 of the real and the imaginary: it has been noted that, for Resnais,
 there is always something real which persists, and notably
spatio-temporal co-ordinates maintaining their reality, even
 though they come into conflict with the imaginary. It is in this way
 that Resnais maintains that something actually did happen ‘Last
 Year . . .’, and, in his subsequent films, establishes a topography
 and a chronology which are all the more rigorous because what
 happens in them is imaginary or mental." While in Robbe-Grillet
 everything happens ‘in the head’ of the characters, or, better, of

104                                                        Cinema 2
the viewer himself. Yet this difference exhibited by Robbe-Grillet
is hardly the point. Nothing happens in the viewer’s head which
does not derive from the character of the image. We have seen
that, in the image, a distinction is always made between the real
and the imaginary, the objective and the subjective, the physical
and the mental, and the actual and the virtual, but that this
distinction becomes reversible, and in that sense indiscernible.
Distinct and yet indiscernible — these are the characteristics of the
imaginary and the real in each of the two authors. So that the
difference between the two can only appear in other ways. It
would present itself rather in the m anner identified by Mireille
Latil: large continuums of real and imaginary in Resnais, in
contrast to Robbe-Grillet’s discontinous blocs or ‘shocks’. But this
new criterion seems incapable of development at the level of the
imaginary-real pair; a third level must necessarily intervene —this
is time.9
   Robbe-Grillet himself suggests that the difference between
himself and Resnais must ultimately be sought at the level of time.
The dissolution of the action-image, and the indiscernibility
which results, sometimes take place in favour of an ‘architecture
of time’ (this would be the case with Resnais), sometimes in favour
of a ‘perpetual present’ cut off from its temporality, that is, of a
structure stripped of time (the case of Robbe-Grillet himself).111
Nevertheless, here again we should not rush into thinking that a
perpetual present implies less time-image than an eternal past.
The present belongs no less to time than the pure past. The
difference is thus in the nature of the time-image, which is plastic
in one case and architectural in the other. For Resnais conceived
Last Year.. . like his other films, in the form of sheets or regions of
past, while Robbe-Grillet sees time in the form of points of
present. If Last Year. . . could be divided, the man X might be said
to be closer to Resnais, and the woman A closer to Robbe-Grillet.
The man basically tries to envelop the woman with continuous
sheets of which the present is the narrowest, like the advance of a
wave, whilst the woman, at times wary, at times stiff, at times
almost convinced, jum ps from one bloc to another, continually
crossing an abyss between two points, two simultaneous presents.
In any event, the two authors, we shall see, are no longer in the
domain of the real and the imaginary but in time, in the even
more alarming domain of the true and the false. O f course the
real and the imaginary continue their circuit, but only as the base
of a higher figure. This is no longer, or no longer only, the

Peaks ofpresent and sheets of past                                   105
indiscernible becoming of distinct images; it is undecidable alternatives
between circles of past, inextricable differences between peaks of
present. With Resnais and Robbe-Grillet, an understanding
occurs, all the stronger for being based on two opposed concep­
tions of time which crashed into each other. The coexistence of
sheets of virtual past, and the simultaneity of peaks of de­
actualized present, are the two direct signs of time itself.
   In an animated film, Chronopolis, Piotr Kamler fashioned time
out of two elements, small balls manipulated with pointed
instruments, and supple sheets covering the balls. The two
elements formed moments, polished and crystal spheres, but
these quickly darkened, unless . . . (we shall see the sequel of this
animated story later).

                                   2
It is a mistake to think of the cinematographic image as being by
nature in the present. Yet Robbe-Grillet on occasion assumes this
attitude for his own purposes, in a strategic or mocking way: after
all, why would he devote so much care to achieving presentimages if this were a given of the image? And the first occasion on
which a direct time-image was seen in the cinema was not in the
(even implicit) mode of the present but, on the contrary, in the
form of sheets of past, with Welles’s Citizen Kane. Here time
became out of joint and reversed its dependent relation to
movement; temporality showed itself as it really was for the first
time, but in the form of a coexistence of large regions to be
explored. The scheme of Citizen Kane may appear simple: Kane
being dead, witnesses who offer their recollection-images in a
series of subjective flashbacks are questioned. But it is more
complex than this. The investigation is focused on ‘Rosebud’
(what is it? or what does this word mean?). And the investigator
carries out soundings; each of the witnesses questioned will be
equivalent to a slice of Kane’s life, a circle or sheet of virtual past, a
continuum. And each time the question is: is it in this continuum,
is it in this sheet, that lies the thing (the being) called Rosebud? It
is true that these regions of past have a chronological course
which is that of the former presents to which they refer. But if this
course can easily be upset it is precisely because in themselves, and
in relation to Llie actual present where the: quest begins (Kane

106                                                        Cinema 2
dead), they are all coexistent, each containing the whole of Kane’s
life in one form or another. Each has what Bergson calls ‘shining
points’, singularities, but each collects around these points the
totality of Kane or his life as a whole as a ‘vague nebulosity’.11 Of
course, it is on these sheets that the witnesses will draw to evoke
the recollection-images, that is, to reconstitute the former
presents. But they are themselves as different from the recollec­
tion-images which actualize them as the pure past may be from
the former present which it was. Each witness jum ps into the past
in general and at once installs himself in one or another coexisting
region, before embodying certain points of the region in a
recollection-image.
   What shows that unity does not lie in the recollection-image is
that the latter bursts out in two directions. It induces two kinds of
very distinct images, and Citizen Kane’s famous montage
determines the continuity of the relations between the two
(rhythm). The first kind of image reconstitutes motor-series of
former presents, ‘events’ [actualitiés] or habits. These are the
cross-cutting shot-reaction shots, the succession of which shows
Kane’s habits as a married man, bleak days and idle periods. It is
the short overall shots whose superimpression shows the cumula­
tive effect of a desire on Kane’s part (to make Susan a singer).
Sartre saw in this the equivalent of the frequentative in English,
the tense of habit or the passing present. But what happens when
Susan’s accumulated efforts emerge into a scene in long shot and
depth of field, her suicide attempt? This time, the image moves to
a true exploration of a sheet of past. The images in depth express
regions of past as such, each with its own accents or potentials,
and mark critical moments in Kane’s will to power. The hero acts,
walks and moves; but it is the past that he plunges himself into
and moves in: time is no longer subordinated to movement, but
movement to time. Hence in the great scene where Kane catches
up in depth with the friend he will break with, it is in the past that
he himself moves; this movement was the break with the friend.
And, at the beginning of Mr Arkadin, the adventurer who
advances in the great court re-emerges from a past whose zones
he will make us explore.12 In short, in the second case the
recollection-image does not pass on in a succession of former
presents which it reconstitutes but goes beyond itself into regions
of coexisting past which make it possible. This is the function of
depth of field: to explore each time a region of past, a continuum.
   Do we have to reconsider the problems of depth of field that

Peaks ofpresent and sheets of past                              107
Bazin was able to propose and resolve by inventing the notion of
‘sequence shot’? The first problem concerned the novelty of the
process. And it seems true, in this respect, that depth reigned
supreme in the image from the beginning of the cinema, as long
as there was neither montage nor cutting, nor camera mobility,
and while the different spatial shots were necessarily given all
together. Nor does it come to an end even when shots become
really distinct but can be joined together in a new whole which
relates each to itself. There are already two forms of depth here
which do not allow themselves to become confused in the cinema,
any more than in painting. They have in common, however, the
fact that they constitute a depth in the image or field and not yet a
depth of field, or a depth of image. If we think of sixteenthcentury painting, we can see a clear distinction, but one which
takes place in parallel and successive planes [plans], each autono­
mous, defined by characters or elements side by side, while they
all contribute to the whole. But each plane, especially the first,
performs its own task and stands only for itself in the grand
business of the painting which harmonizes them. It will be a novel
change, and crucial, in the seventeenth century, when an element
of a plane refers directly to an element of a different plane, when
characters address each other directly from one plane to another,
in an organization of the picture along the diagonal, or through a
gap which thus privileges the background and brings it into
immediate touch with the foreground. The picture ‘is internally
hollowed out’. At this moment, depth becomes depth of field,
whilst the dimensions of the foreground take on an abnormal
size, and those of the background are reduced, in a violent
perspective which does even more to unite the near and the
faraway.13
   The same story runs through the cinema. For a long time,
depth was produced by a simple juxtaposition of independent
shots [plans], a succession of parallel planes [plans] in the image:
the conquest of Babylon in Griffith’s Intolerance, for instance,
shows the lines of defence of the besieged in depth, from
foreground to background, each with its own importance and
connecting neighbouring elements into a harmonious whole.
Welles invents a depth of field, in a very different way, along a
diagonal or gap crossing all planes, making elements from each
interact with the rest, and in particular having the background in
direct contact with the foreground (as in the suicide scene where
Kane bursts in through the door at the back, tiny, while Susan is

108                                                      Cinema 2
dying in the shadow in mid-shot and the large m irror is seen in
close-up. Diagonals like this will be seen in Wyler, as in The Best
Years of Our Life, when a character is busy in a secondary, but
picturesque, scene in the foreground while another character
makes a crucial telephone call in the background: the first
watches the second along a diagonal which joins the back to the
front, and makes them react. Before Welles, the only precursors
in depth of field seem to have been Renoir, with La règle du jeu,
and Stroheim, particularly in Greed. Increasing depth by the use
of wide angles, Welles obtains gigantic dimensions in the fore­
ground connected to reductions of size in the background, which
becomes all the more powerful; the light-centre is at the back,
while masses of shadow are allowed to take up the foreground
and the whole is scored with stark contrasts; ceilings inevitably
become apparent, whether in the placing of a height which is
itself enormous, or, in contrast, in a crushing which follows the
perspective. The volume of each body overflows any given plane
\plari], plunging into or emerging from shadow and expressing
the relationship of this body with the others located in front or
behind: an art of masses. The term ‘baroque’ or neo-expression­
ism is literally appropriate. In this freeing of depth which now
subordinates all other dimensions we should see not only the
conquest of a continuum but the temporal nature of this
continuum: it is a continuity of duration which means that the
unbridled depth is of time and no longer of space.14 It is
irreducible to the dimensions of space. As long as depth remained
caught in the simple succession of parallel planes, it already
represented time, but in an indirect way which kept it subordinate
to space and movement. The new depth, in contrast, directly
forms a region of time, a region of past which is defined by optical
aspects or elements borrowed from interacting planes.15 It is a set
of non-Iocalizable connections, always from one plane to another,
which constitutes the region of past or the continuum of
duration.
   The second problem concerns the function of this depth of
field. We know that Bazin gave it a function of reality, since the
viewer had to organize his perception himself in the image
instead of receiving it ready-made. Mitry denied this, seeing in
depth of field a no less restrictive organization which forces the
viewer to follow the diagonal or gap. Bazin’s position was
nevertheless complex: he showed that this gain in reality could be
achieved only through an ‘excess of theatricality’ as we saw in La

Peaks ofpresent and sheets of past                                 109
regie dujeu.'6 But neither a function of theatricality nor one of
reality seems to exhaust this complicated problem. We suggest
that depth of field has many functions, and that they all come
together in a direct time-image. The special quality of depth of
field would be to reverse time’s subordination to movement and
show time for itself. We are not saying that depth of field has the
exclusive rights to the time-image. For there are many other
kinds of direct time-images. T here are time-images which are
formed through suppression of depth (depth in the field as well
as depth of field) and this case of the planitude of the image itself
has a number of forms; it is a varied concept of dme since the
processes are not the same in Dreyer, Robbe-Grillet, Syberberg
. . . O ur point is that depth of field creates a certain type of direct
dme-image that can be defined by memory, virtual regions of
past, the aspects of each region. This would be less a function of
reality than a function of remembering, of temporalization: not
exactly a recollection but ‘an invitation to recollect. . . ’
    We must note the fact before trying to explain it: most of the
occasions where depth of field appears wholly necessary are in
connection with memory. And here again cinema is Bergsonian:
it is not a case of a psychological memory, made up of recollection-images, as the flashback can conventionally represent it. It is
not a case of a succession of presents passing according to
chronological time. It is a case either of an attempt to evoke,
produced in an actual present, and preceding the formation of
recollection-images, or of the exploration of a sheet of past from
which these recollection-images will later arise. It is an on-thisside-of and a beyond of psychological memory: the two poles of a
metaphysics of memory. These two extremes of memory are
presented by Bergson as follows: the extension of sheets of past
and the contraction of the actual present.17 And the two are
connected, since to evoke recollection is to jum p into a region of
past where one assumes that it is lying in a virtual state, all the
sheets or regions coexisting in relation to the contracted actual
present from which the evocation proceeds (whilst they follow
each other psychologically in relation to the presents that they
were). What must be noted is that depth of field sometimes shows
us evocation in the act of occurring and sometimes virtual sheets
of past that we explore in order to find the recollection sought.
The first case, contraction, often appears in Citizen Kane: a
high-angle shot, for instance, bears down on an alcoholic Susan
lost in the big room at the club in such a way as to force her to

110                                                           Cinema 2
evoke. In another case, in The Magnificient Ambersons, a whole
scene maintained in depth is justified because the young boy
wants, without appearing to want, to force his aunt to remember a
recollection that is crucial for him .18 And similarly, in The Trial,
the low-angle shot at the beginning marks the starting-point of
the hero’s efforts as he searches at all costs for what the law is
charging him with. The second case can be seen in most of the
scenes in transverse depth in Citizen Kane, where each cor­
responds to a sheet of past of which it is asked: is it here that the
virtual secret, Rosebud, is lying? And in Mr Arkadin, where the
successive characters are sheets of past, stages towards other
sheets, all coexisting in relation to the contracted initial effort. 11 is
quite clear that the recollection-image is of little interest in itself,
but that it presupposes two things which go beyond it: a variation
in the sheets of pure past where it can be found and a contraction
of the actual present which is the stardng-point of the continually
renewed search. Depth of field will go from one to the other, from
extreme contraction to large sheets and vice versa. Welles
‘deforms space and time simultaneously; dilating and contracting
them in turn, he dominates or gets deep inside a situation’.I!*The
high- and low-angle shots form contractions, just as oblique and
lateral tracking shots form sheets. Depth of field feeds on these
two sources of memory. Not the recollection-image (or flashback)
but the actual effort of evocation, to summon this up, and the
exploration of virtual zones of past, to find, choose and bring it
back.
   Many critics today consider depth of field to be a technical
procedure which is in danger of hiding from us still more
important innovations on Welles’s part. These innovations
indeed exist. But depth retains its full importance, beyond a
technique, if we take it as a function of remembering, that is, a
figure of temporalization. It then gives rise to all kinds of
adventures of the memory, which are not so much psychological
accidents as misadventures of time, disturbances of its consti­
tution. Welles’s films develop these problems according to a
rigorous progression. Bergson distinguished two main instances:
the past recollection may still be evoked in an image, but the latter
is now useless, because the present from which the evocation set
off has lost its motor-extension which would make the image
usable; or, secondly, the recollection can no longer be evoked in
an image, although it persists in a region of past, but the actual
present can no longer reach it. In one case recollections ‘are still

Peaks of present and sheets of past                             111
evoked but can no longer be applied to corresponding
perceptions’, in the other ‘evocation of recollections is itself
prevented’.20 We find the dramatic equivalent of these instances
in Welles’s films where temporalization operates through
memory.
   It all begins with Citizen Kane. It has often been said that depth
internalized montage in the scene, in the mise-en-scene, but this is
only partly correct. The sequence shot is clearly a sheet of past,
with its nebulae and shining points which will feed the
recollection-image and determine what it retains from a former
present. But montage persists in its own right under three other
aspects: the relation between the sequence shots or sheets of past
and the short shots of passing presents; the relation of the sheets
between themselves, each with the others (as Burch remarked,
the longer a shot is, the more important it is to know where and
how to end it); the relation of the sheets to the contracted actual
present which evokes them. In this respect, each witness in Citizen
Kane makes his effort to evoke, which corresponds to the sheet of
past to which he is committed. But all of these efforts coincide in
the actuality of ‘Kane has just died, Kane is dead’ which
constitutes a kind of given, fixed point from the outset (similarly
in Mr Arkadin and Othello). And it is in relation to death as a fixed
point where all the sheets of past coexist; childhood, youth, the
adult and the old man. If montage, therefore, remains the
cinematographic act par excellence in Welles it none the less
changes its meaning: instead of producing an indirect image of
time on the basis of movement, it will organize the order of
 non-chronological coexistences or relations in the direct time-
 image. Diverse sheets of past will be evoked and will embody their
aspects in recollection-images. And, on each occasion, it is on the
 theme: is it here that the pure recollection ‘Rosebud’ lies?
 Rosebud will not be found in any of the regions explored, even
 though it is in one of them, in that of childhood, but so deeply
 buried that it is overlooked. Moreover, when Rosebud becomes
 embodied from its own movement in an image it is strictly for
 nobody, in the hearth where the discarded sledge burns. Not only
 could Rosebud have been anything; in so far as it is something, it
 goes down into an image which burns independently, is totally
 pointless and of interest to no one.21 It thereby casts suspicion on
 all the sheets of past which have been evoked by the various
 characters, even the ones who were interested: the images to
 which they gave rise were perhaps useless in turn, since there is no

112                                                        Cinema 2
longer a present to welcome them, and because Kane died alone,
recognizing the empdness of his whole life, the sterility of all his
sheets.
   In The Magnificent Ambersons, it is no longer a suspicion induced
by the singularity ‘Rosebud’ but a certainty which crashes
headlong into the whole. The sheets of past can still be evoked
and summoned: Isabelle's marriage of pride, George’s child­
hood, his youth, the Amberson family. . . But the images that are
drawn from these are now quite useless because they can no
longer be inserted into a present which would extend them into
action: the town has been so transformed, the new modvity of cars
has replaced that of carriages, the present has changed so
profoundly that the recollections can no longer be used. This is
why the film does not begin with a death, but with a commentary
which precedes any image, and which finds its conclusion at the
moment when the fall of the family has taken place: ‘It is done,
but those who wanted to be present were dead, and those who
were alive had forgotten the man and what they wanted.’ The
recollections have lost all extension, now being useless even to
give pleasure to the prophets and vengeance-seekers. The
infiltration of death is so complete that there is no longer a need
for a death at the beginning. All the evocations coincide with
deaths, and every death coincides with the sublime death of the
major, in the course of the film: 'He knew that he had to prepare
himself for entering an unknown region where he wasn’t even
sure of being recognized as an Amberson.’ The recollections fall
into the void because the present has hidden itself and goes
elsewhere, withdrawing any possible insertion from them. Yet it is
doubtful that Welles simply wishes to show the vanity of the past.
If there is a nihilism in Welles, it is not here. Death as fixed point
has a different meaning. What he is showing —already in Citizen
Kane —is this: as soon as we reach the sheets of past it is as if we
were carried away by the undulations of a great wave, dme gets
out of joint, and we enter into temporality as a state of permanent
crisis.
  '   *   22

   A third step is taken with The Ladyfrom Shanghai. Previously the
sheets of past went beyond the recollection-images in all direc­
tions; but their evocation made them produce images of this kind
even if these images were floating and had no other application
but death. The new situation is very different: the sheets or
regions of past are always there, and can still be distinguished, yet
they can no longer be evoked and are now accompanied by no

Peaks of present and sheets of past                              113
recollection-image. But then how are they distinguished, since no
recollection-image is responsible for them or draws its trademark
from them? It is as if the past surfaces in itself but in the shape of
personalities which are independent, alienated, off-balance, in
some sense embryonic, strangely acdve fossils, radioactive, inex­
plicable in the present where they surface, and all the more
harmful and autonomous. Not recollections but hallucinations.
Madness, the split personality, now shows the past. The story of
The Lady from Shanghai is that of an initially naïve hero caught in
the past of others, captured, snapped up (there is a similarity here
with Minnelli’s subjects, without going so far as to talk of
influence, which would not please Welles). We have three
characters in turmoil, like three sheets of past who come and
submerge the hero, without his being able to evoke anything of
these sheets or even decide between them. There is Grisby, the
man who appears like a spring-loaded devil; and on this sheet the
hero finds himself hunted for m urder, when what had been
suggested to him was apparendy a fake murder. There is the
lawyer Bannister, with his cane, his paralysis and his outrageous
limp, who wants to get him sentenced when he suggested to him a
cast-iron defence. There is the woman, the lunatic queen of the
Chinese quarter, by whom he is totally obsessed, whilst she makes
use of his love, from the depth of an indecipherable Oriental past.
The hero becomes all the more crazy because he can recognize
nothing of these pasts which are realized in alienated personali­
ties, and perhaps projections of his own past which have become
independent.21 And still the Others exist, have a reality and run
the game in The Ladyfrom Shanghai. A fourth step will be taken in
Mr Arkadin: how to make one’s own past incapable of being
recalled? The hero will have to feign amnesia in order to send off
an investigator who must locate the immature personalities
emanating from the regions of this past, haunting different
places which are now only stages in the exploration of time. These
witnesses will be m urdered one by one by Arkadin as he follows
the trails of the investigation. He makes out that he is recouping
all the splits in himself into a grandiose, paranoid unity which
would know nothing but a present without memory, true amnesia
at last. Welles’s nihilism finds a way of being expressed which is
inherited from Nietzsche: suppress your recollections, or sup­
press yourselves . .. The fact that everything begins and ends
with the disappearance of Arkadin, as in Citizen Kane, does not
stop the inexorable progress from one film to the next: Welles is

114                                                          Cinema 2
no longer content to show the pointlessness of an evocation of the
past, in a permanent state of crisis of time; he shows the
impossibility of any evocation, the becoming-impossible of evo­
cation in a still more fundamental state of time. The regions of
past will keep their secret, and the call to recollection remains
empty. The investigator will not even tell what he knows, but,
under the pressure of time, will only beg the girl to say that he has
told her it.
   The Trial links up with Mr Arkadin. In which sheet of past is the
hero to look for the offence that he is guilty of? He can no longer
recall anything about it, but the whole of it is hallucinatory.
Characters fixed to the spot and a veiled statue. There is the
region of women, there is the region of books, that of childhood
and of little girls, that of art and that of religion. The present is no
more than an empty door from where the past can no longer be
recalled, since it has already left while it was being waited for.
Each region of the past will be explored in these long shots of
which Welles has the secret: for instance, the long race in a
trellised walk whilst the hero is pursued by a crowd of shouting
little girls (The Lady from Shanghai already showed a comparable
race by the pseudo-murderer in a trellised space). But the regions
of past no longer release recollection-images; they set free
hallucinatory presences: women, books, little girls, homosexu­
ality, paintings. Except, in all this, it is as if certain sheets have
subsided, and others risen in such a way that here and there there
are juxtapositions of one particular age with a different one, as in
archaeology. Nothing is decidable any more: the coexisting sheets
 now juxtapose their segments. The most serious book is also a
pornographic book; the most threatening adults are also children
that you smack; women are at the disposition of justice, but justice
is perhaps managed by little girls; and is the lawyer’s secretary,
with her webbed fingers, a woman, a little girl, a skimmedthrough file? It is as if by breaking up and becoming unbalanced
 the regions of past have entered into the element of a superior
justice which stirs them up; from a past in general where
existences pay each other the price of their injustice (according to
a pre-Socratic formulation). Welles’s success in relation to Kafka
is that he was able to show how spatially distant and chronologi­
cally separate regions were in touch with each other, at the bottom
 of a limitless time which made them contiguous: this is what depth
 of field is used for, the areas which are the furthest apart are in
 direct contact in the background.2'1 But what is this background

Peaks of present and sheets of past                             115
common to all the sheets, from which they emerge and into which
they go back on breaking up? What is this superior justice, which
all the regions are merely secondary to?
   The sheets of past exist, they are strata from where we draw
our recollection-images. But either they are in any case unu­
sable, because death is a perm anent present, the most contracted
region; or they can no longer be recalled because they are
breaking up and becoming twisted, scattered in a non-stradfied
substance. And perhaps the two cases come together; perhaps
we find the universal substance only at the contracted point of
death. But there is no confusion in this; these are two different
states of time, time as perpetual crisis and, at a deeper level, time
as primary matter, immense and terrifying, like universal be­
coming. There is a passage in Herman Melville which seems
specially intended for Welles: we go from bandage to bandage,
from stratum to stratum at the heart of the pyramid, at the cost
of terrible effort, and all that to discover that there is no one in
the funeral chamber — unless it is here that ‘the substance
without stratification’ begins.2n This is definitely not a transcen­
dent element; but it is an immanent justice, the earth, and its
non-chronological order in so far as each of us is directly from it
and not from parents: autochthony. It is in the earth that we die
and atone for our birth. In Welles, the usual way of dying is flat
on your stomach, the body already in the earth, dragging
yourself, crawling. All the coexistent strata are in touch and
adjacent to each other in a muddy vital medium. The earth as
primordial time of the autochthonous. And this is what the
cohort of Welles’s great characters see: the hero of Touch of Evil
who dies in the wet, blackish earth; the one in Trial who dies in
the hole in the ground, and, earlier, Major Amberson in great
 pain, speaking with difficulty: ‘ — and us, we came out of the
earth . . . So in any case we ought to be in the earth . . . ’ The
earth was able to sink beneath the waters in order to sustain its
 primitive monsters, as in the aquarium scene and the story of the
sharks in The Lady from Shanghai. And Macbeth, especially
Macbeth. It is here that Bazin was able to see the element of
 Welles’s characters: ‘This creosoted cardboard set, these barba­
 rian Scotsmen, wearing animal-skins and brandishing a kind of
 lance-cross made of gnarled wood, these strange places tinkling
 with water and crowned by mists which prevent any hint of a sky
 that would probably not have any stars in it, literally constitute a
 universe of prehistory, not that of our ancestors the Gauls or the

116                                                         Cinema 2
but a prehistory of consciousness at the birth of time and sin,
when sky and earth, water and fire, good and evil are not yet
clearly separated.,2B

                                  3
Resnais is perhaps closest to Welles, his most independent and
creative disciple, who transforms the whole problem. For, in
Welles, a fixed point persists, even if it is in contact with the earth
(low-angle shot). It is a present offered to our view, someone’s
death, sometimes given from the start, sometimes prefigured. It
is also a sound-present, the story-teller’s voice, the voice-off,
which constitutes a radiophonie centre whose role is essential in
Welles.27 And it is in relation to this fixed point that all the strata
or sheets of past coexist and confront each other. Now the first
novelty in Resnais is the disappearance of the centre or fixed
point. Death does not fix an actual present, so numerous are the
dead who haunt the sheets of past (‘9 million dead haunt this
landscape’, ‘200,000 dead in 9 seconds . . . ’). The voice-off is no
longer central, either because it enters into relationships of
dissonance with the visual image or because it is divided or
multiplied (the different voices which say ‘I was born . . . ’ in My
American Uncle). As a general rule, the present begins to float,
struck with uncertainty, dispersed in the characters’ comings and
goings or already absorbed by the past.2" Even in the machine for
going back in time (Je t’aime je t’aime) the present defined by the
four minutes of decompression required does not have the time
to become fixed, to be counted, but will send the guinea-pig back
to levels that are always different. In Muriel, the new Boulogne
has no centre, any more than the flat with the provisional
furniture: none of the people has a present, except perhaps the
last who finds only emptiness. In short, the confrontation
between sheets of past take place directly, each capable of being
present in relation to the next: for the woman, Hiroshima will be
the present of Nevers, but for the man, Nevers will be the present
of Hiroshima. Resnais had begun with a collective memory, that
of the Nazi concentration camps, that of Guernica, that of the
Bibliothèque Nationale. But he discovers the paradox of a
memory for two people, or a memory for several: the different
levels of past no longer relate to a single character, a single family,

Peaks of present and sheets of past                              117
or a single group, but to quite different characters as to
unconnected places which make up a world-memory. He attains a
generalized relativity, and takes to its conclusion what was only a
direction in Welles: constructing undecidable alternatives between
sheets of past. In this way we can also understand his antagonism
to Robbe-Grillet, and the productive ambiguity of the two
authors’ collaboration: an architecture of the memory such that it
explains or develops the coexistent levels of past rather than an
art of peaks which implies simultaneous presents. In both cases
there is a disappearance of the centre or fixed point, but in
opposite ways.29
   Let us try to make some data sheets which would indicate an
order of progress in certain of Resnais’ films, rather than a
dialectic and oppositions. Je t’aimeje t'aime: despite the apparatus
of science fiction, this is the simplest figure of time, because here
memory concerns only one character. It is true that the
memory-machine does not consist in recollecting but in reliving a
precise moment of the past. However, what is possible for the
animal, the mouse, is impossible for the man. For the man the
past moment is like a shining point which belongs to a sheet and
cannot be detached from it. An ambiguous moment can take part
in two sheets, love for Catrine and the decline of this love.311 So
that the hero will only be able to relive it by crossing these sheets
again, and by, from that moment, crossing many others (before
he knew Catrine, after Catrine’s death . . .) All kinds of regions
are thus stirred up in the memory of a man jum ping from one to
the other, and seem to emerge one after another from an original
swamp, universal lapping embodied by the eternal nature of
Catrine (‘You are still, you are a swamp, of night, of mud . . . You
smell of low tide . . . ’). Last Year in Marienbad is a more complex
figure, because here the memory is for two characters. But it is a
memory which is still shared, since it refers to the same givens,
affirmed by one of them and refused or denied by the other.
What happens is that the character X revolves in a circuit of past
which includes A as shining point, as ‘aspect’, whilst A is in regions
which do not include X or do so only in a nebulous way. Will A
allow herself to be attracted into X’s sheet, or will the latter be
shattered and unhinged by A’s resistances which are rolled up in
her own sheets? Hiroshima mon amour complicates matters still
more. There are two characters, but each has his or her own
memory which is foreign to the other. There is no longer
anything at all in common. It is like two incommensurable regions

118                                                          Cinema 2
of past, Hiroshima and Nevers. And while the Japanese refuses
the woman entry into his own region (‘I’ve seen everything . . .
everything. .. You’ve seen nothing in Hiroshima, nothing
the woman draws the Japanese into hers, willingly and with his
consent, up to a certain point. Is this not a way for each of them to
forget his or her own memory, and make a memory for two, as if
memory was now becoming world, detaching itself from their
persons? Muriel: there are two memories again, each marked by a
war, Boulogne and Algeria. But this time each one includes
several sheets or regions of past which refer to the different
characters: three levels concerning the letter from Boulogne (the
man who has written the letter, the man who has or has not sent it
and the woman who has not received it); two levels concerning the
Algerian war (the young soldier and the hotel-owner). This is a
memory world, for several people, and at several levels, who
contradict, accuse and grab each other. La guene estfinie does not,
it seems to us, signal a mutation, a return to the present, but a
deepening of the same problem. For the hero’s present is itself no
more than an ‘age’, a certain age of Spain which is never given as
present. There is the age of the civil war, in which the committee
in exile remains fixed. There is the new age of the young radical
terrorists. And the present of the hero, an ‘official’ [Jpermanent] of
the organization, is itself only an age of Spain, a level which is
distinct from that of the civil war no less than from the young
generation who have not experienced it. What appeared as past,
present and future is just as much three ages of Spain, so that
something new is produced, whether in the deciding between
them or at the edge of undecidability. The idea of age tends to
become distinct, to take on an autonomous political, historical, or
archaeological range. My American Uncle will continue this explor­
ation of ages: three characters each of whom has several levels
and several ages. There are constants: each age, each sheet, will
be defined by a territory, lines of flight and blockages of these
lines; these are the topological and cartological limits proposed by
Laborit. But the distribution varies from one age to another and
from one character to another. The ages become ages of the
world, in their variations, because they concern animals as such
 (man and mouse rediscover a common fate, contrary to what
 happened in Je t’aime je t'aime), but also because they concern a
 superhuman cosmos, the island and its treasure. It is in this sense
 that Bergson spoke of durations which are inferior and superior
 to man/all coexisting. Life is a tied of Roses finally develops the idea

Peaks of present and sheets of past                              119
of three ages in its own right; three ages of the world, three ages
of the château, three coexisting ages related to the human, but
each possessing and absorbing its own characters rather than all
relating to given people: the age of the Ancient, and utopia; the
age of the Modern, and the conference, the techno-democratic
organization; the age of Childhood, and legend. Throughout
Resnais’ work we plunge into a memory which overflows the
conditions of psychology, memory for two, memory for several,
memory-world, memory-ages of the world.
   But the question as a whole remains: what are the sheets of past
in the cinema of Resnais, whether levels of a single mtemory,
regions of several memories, creation of a memory-world, or
demonstration of the ages of the world? We must distinguish
several aspects here. In the first place, each sheet of past is a
continuum. If Resnais’ tracking shots are famous it is because
they define, or rather construct, continuums, circuits of variable
speed, following the shelving in the Bibliothèque Nationale,
becoming immersed in the paintings of some period of Van
Gogh. But it seems to be a characteristic of each continuum,
within one type, to be pliable. This is what mathematicians call
‘the Boulanger transformation’: a square may be pulled into a
rectangle whose two halves will form a new square, with the result
that the total surface is redistributed with each transformation. If
we take the smallest imaginable region of this surface, two
infinitely close points will end up being separated, each allocated
to one half, at the end of a certain number of transformations.31
Each transformation has an ‘internal age’, and we may think of a
coexistence of sheets or continuums of different ages. This
coexistence or these transformations form a topology. For
instance, the different sections correspond to each of the char­
acters in My American Uncle, or the various periods of Van Gogh: so
many strata. In Last Year in Marienbad, we are in a situation for two
characters, A and X, such that X settles on a sheet where he is very
close to A, whilst A is on a sheet of a different age where she is on
the contrary distant and separated from X. These are not simply
accentuated geometric figures; it is the third character, M, who is
witness here of the transformation of a single continuum. The
question of knowing if two continuums of a different type, each
 having a ‘middle age’, can in turn be assimilated to the trans­
 formation of a single one surfaces with Hiroshima mon amour, in
such a way that one is a modification of the other in all its regions:
 Hiroshima —Nevers (or from one character to the other in My

120                                                        Cinema 2
American Uncle). It is in this way that the notion of age, ages of the
world and ages of memory, is profoundly justified in Resnais’
cinema: events do not just succeed each other or simply follow a
chronological course; they are constantly being rearranged
according to whether they belong to a particular sheet of paitTa
particular continuum oifage. all of which coexist. Did X know A
dr not? Did RidcierTairCatnne, or was it an accident, in Je 'taimeje
t’aime? Was the letter in Muriel sent and not received, and who
wrote it? These are undecidable alternatives between sheets of
past, because their transformations are stricdy probabilistic from
the point of view of the coexistence of ages. Everything depends
on which sheet you are located on. And this is always the
dif terence that we find between Resnais and Robbe-Grillet: what
one gets through discontinuity of peaks of present (leaps), the
other obtains by transformation of continuous sheets of past.
There is a statistical probabilism in Resnais which is completely
different from the indeterminism of the ‘quantum’ type in
Robbe-Grillet.
   Yet Resnais has subdued the discontinuous as much as RobbeGrillet has subdued continuity. This is the second aspect which we
see in Resnais, deriving from the first. What happens is that the
transformations or new distributions of a continuum consistently
and inevitably end in a fragmentation: a region, no matter how
small, will be fragmented, at the same time as its closest points will
each move into a half; every region of a continuum ‘may begin by
changing shape in a continuous way but will end up being cut in
two, and its parts will in turn be fragmented’ (Stengers). Muriel,
and especially Je t’aime je t’aime, exhibit this inevitable fragmen­
tation of sheets of past to the highest degree. But before them Van
Gogh created a coexistence of periods the last of which, the one in
Provence, speeds up the tracking shots across the canvases, and
also multiplies the cutting shots and extends the dissolves into
black, in a ‘hacked montage’ [montage hache] which ends in deep
blackness.32 In short, the continuums or strata continually frag­
ment at the same time as they become rearranged, from one age
to another. Inje t’aimeje t’aime, a perpetual stirring will make what
was faraway close and what was close faraway. The continuum
continually fragments, to give a different continuum, itself in
course of fragmentation. The fragmentations are inseparable
from the topology, that is, from the transformation of a conti­
nuum. We see here a technical stress which is essential in the'
cinema. Just as with Welles, as we shall see, short montage is not

Peaks of present and sheets of past                              121
opposed to wide shots or tracking shots: montage is in strict
correlation with these, and marks the age of their transformation.
As Godard remarked, Resnais sometimes does a tracking shot
with two fixed shots, but he also produces a fragmentation by
tracking, for instance from the Japanese river to the banks of the
Loire.33 It is perhaps in Providence that cut and continuum attain
the highest unity: the one brings together states of body (organic
rattlings), states of world (storm and thunder), states of history
(bursts of machine-gun fire, bombs exploding), whilst the other
carries out the redistributions and transformations of these
states. As in mathematics, cuts no longer indicate continuity
solutions but variable distributions between the points of a
continuum.
    In the third place, Resnais has never disguised his liking, in his
preparatory works, for a complete biography of the characters, a
detailed cartography of the places they go to and their itineraries,
an establishment of diagrams in a true sense: even Last Year. . . is
caught up in this requirement of his. For biographies already
allow him to delimit the different ‘ages’ of each character. But, in
addition, a map corresponds to each age, that is, to a continuum
or a sheet of past. And the diagram is the set of transformations of
the continuum, the piling-up of strata or the superimposing of
coexistent sheets. The maps and diagrams survive, then, as
integral parts of the film. The maps appear, first, as descriptions
of objects, places and landscapes: series of objects are used as
witnesses from Van Gogh, to Muriel and to My American Uncle,34
But these objects are above all functional, and function in Resnais
is not the simple use of the object but the mental function or level
of thought which corresponds to it: ‘Resnais conceives of cinema
 not as an instrument for representing reality but as the best way of
 approaching the way the mind functions.’31 Van Gogh already set
 out to deal with painted things as real objects whose functions
 would be the artist’s ‘internal world’. And what makes Night and
 Fog so overpowering is that Resnais succeeds in showing, by
 means of things and victims, not only the functioning of the camp
 but also the mental functions, which are cold, diabolical, almost
 impossible to understand, which preside over its organization. In
 the Bibliothèque Nationale the books, trolleys, shelving, stairs,
 lifts and corridors constitute the elements and levels of a gigantic
 memory where men themselves are only mental functions, or
 ‘neuronic messengers’.315As a result of this functionalism, carto­
 graphy is essentially mental, cerebral, and Resnais has always said

122                                                           Cinema 2
that what interested him was the brain, the brain as world, as
memory, as ‘memory of the world’. It is in the most concrete way
that Resnais attains a cinema, creates a cinema which has only one
single character, Thought. Each map is in this sense a mental
continuum, that is, a sheet of past which makes a distribution of
functions correspond to a distribution of objects. The carto­
graphical method and coexistence of maps in Resnais may be
distinguished from the photographic method in Robbe-Grillet,
and his simultaneity of snapshots, even when the two methods
result in a common product. In Resnais, the diagram will be a
superimposing of maps which define a set of transformations
from sheet to sheet, with redistributions of functions and
fragmentations of objects: the superimposed ages of Auschwitz.
My American Uncle will be a grand attempt at diagrammatic mental
cartography, where maps are superimposed and transformed, in
a single character and from one character to the next.
    But, in the fourth place, it is the accent on memory which seems
to create a problem. It is obvious that, if memory is reduced to the
recollection-image and flashback, Resnais makes no special
provision for it and has little to do with it. It is not difficult to show
that dreams and nightmares, fantasies, hypotheses and antici­
 pations, all forms of the imaginary, are more important than
 flashbacks.37 It is true that there are some well-known ones in
Hiroshima mon amour, but in Last Year in Marienbad we can no
 longer tell what is flashback and what is not; and in Muriel there
 are none, likewise with Je t’aimeje t’aime (‘There are absolutely no
 flashbacks or anything of the sort,’ says Resnais). Night and Fog
could even be thought of as the sum of all the ways of escaping
 from the flashback, and the false piety of the recollection-image.
 But in this way we are not going beyond an observation that holds
 good for all the great film-makers of time: the flashback is just a
 useful convention which, when it is employed, must always be
justified from elsewhere. In Resnais’ case, however, this in­
 adequacy of the flashback does not stop his work as a whole being
 based on the coexistence of sheets of past, the present no longer
 even intervening as centre of evocation. The machine of Je t’aime
je t’aime stirs up and fragments sheets of past in which the
 character is totally caught up and relives. Night and Fog sets out to
 invent a memory which is all the more alive for no longer passing
 through recollection-image. How can we explain such an appar­
 ently paradoxical situation?
    We must go back to the Bergsonian distinction between rhe

Peaks of present and sheets of past                              123
‘pure recollection’, which is always virtual, and ‘the recollectionimage’, which makes it actual only in relation to a present. In a
crucial passage, Bergson says that pure recollection should
definitely not be confused with the recollection-image which
derives from it; it remains a ‘magnetizer’ behind the halluci­
nations which it prompts.38 On each occasion, pure recollection is
in a sheet or continuum which is preserved in time. Each sheet of
past has its distribution, its fragmentation, its shining points, its
nebulae, in short an age. When I take up position on such a sheet,
two things can happen: either I discover there the point I was
looking for, which will thus be actualized in a recollection-image,
but it is clear that the latter does not possess in itself the mark of
the past which it only inherits; or I do not discover the point,
because it is on a different sheet which is inaccessible to me,
belonging to a different age. Last Year in Marienbad is precisely a
story of magnetism, hypnotism, in which we might say that X has
recollection-images and that A does not, or only very vague ones,
because they are not on the same sheet.39 But a third case can
arise: we constitute a continuum with fragments of different
ages; we make use of transformations which take place between
two sheets to constitute a sheet of transformation.. For instance, in
a dream, there is no longer one recollection-image which
embodies one particular point of a given sheet; there are a
number of images which are embodied within' each other, each
referring to a different point of the sheet. Perhaps, when we read
a book, watch a show, or look at a painting, and especially when
we are ourselves the author, an analogous process can be
triggered: we constitute a sheet of transformation which invents a
kind of transverse continuity or communication between several
sheets, and weaves a network of non-localizable relations between
them. In this way we extract non-chronological time. We draw out
a sheet which, across all the rest, catches and extends the
trajectory of points, the evolution of regions. This is evidently a
task which runs the risk of failure: sometimes we only produce an
incoherent dust made out of juxtaposed borrowings; sometimes
we only form generalities which retain mere resemblances. All
this is the territory of false recollections with which we trick
ourselves or try to trick others (Muriel). But it is possible for the
work of art to succeed in inventing these paradoxical hypnotic
and hallucinatory sheets whose property is to be at once a past and
always to come. It is a third possibility which was suggested for
 Marienbad: M would be the dramatist-story teller of whom X and

124                                                      Cinema 2
A would be simply the characters, or better the two sheets from
which he will draw out a transverse one. It is above all in
Providence, one of Resnais’ finest films, that we witness these
redistributions, fragmentations and transformations which go
continually from one sheet to another, so creating a new one
which takes them all away, goes back to the animal and extends to
the edges of the world. There are many difficulties and failures in
this work of the drunken old story-teller: for instance, three
terraces borrowed from three ages, and the footballer, which
sheet has he come from, and should he keep it? Benayoun goes to
the heart of the matter when he says: ‘The absence of the
childhood-adolescence-adult age succession in Resnais .. . per­
haps pushes him to reconstitute a synthesis of the life-cycle on the
creative plane, starting with birth and perhaps foetal age, up to
death and its preceding experiences, even if he combines them all
on occasion in the same character.’40 The work of art crosses
coexistent ages, unless it is prevented from doing so, fixed on an
exhausted sheet, in a mortified fragmentation (Les statues meurent
aussi). Success appears when the artist, like Van Gogh, reaches
that excess which transforms the ages of memory or the world: a
‘magnetic’ operation, and this operation explains the ‘montage’
rather than the other way round.
    No author is less bound up in the past. It is a cinema which, in
an endeavour to sketch the present, prevents the past from being
debased into recollection. Each sheet of past, each age calls up all
the mental functions simultaneously: recollection, but equally
forgetting, false recollection, imagination, planning, judgem ent
. .. What is loaded with all these functions, each time, is feeling.
Life is a Bed of Roses begins with ‘love, love’. It is feeling which
stretches out on a sheet and is modified according to its
fragmentation. Resnais has often declared that it is not characters
that interest him but the feelings that they could extract from
them like their shadows, depending on which regions of past they
are placed in. Characters are of the present, but feelings plunge
into the past. Feelings become characters, as in the painted
shadows in the sunless park (Last Year in Marienbad). This is where
 music becomes specially important. Resnais may therefore some­
times think that he is going beyond psychology, sometimes that he
 is remaining within it, depending on whether we are talking
about a psychology of characters or a psychology of pure feelings.
 And feeling is that which is in continual exchange, circulating
 from one sheet to another according to what transformations

Peaks of present and sheets of past                                 125
occur. But when transformations themselves form a sheet which
crosses all the others it is as if feelings set free the consciousness or
thought with which they were loaded: a becoming conscious
according to which shadows are the living realities of a mental
theatre and feelings the true figures in a ‘cerebral game1which is
very concrete. It is hypnosis which reveals thought to itself. In a
single movement, Resnais goes beyond characters towards feel­
ings, and beyond feelings towards the thought of which they are
the characters. This is why Resnais is always saying that he is
interested only in what happens in the brain, in cerebral
mechanisms —monstrous, chaouc, or creative mechanisms.41 If
feelings are ages of the world, thought is the non-chronological
time which corresponds to them. If feelings are sheets of past,
thought, the brain, is the set of non-localizable relations between
all these sheets, the continuity which rolls them up and unrolls
them like so many lobes, preventing them from halting and
becoming fixed in a death-position. According to the novelist
Belyi, ‘we are the unrolling of a cinematographic film subject to
the minute action of occult forces: should the film stop, we will be
fixed for ever in an artificial pose of terror’.42 In cinema, Resnais
says, something ought to happen ‘around the image, behind the
image and even inside the image’. This is what happens when the
image becomes time-image. T he world has become memory,
brain, superimposition of ages or lobes, but the brain itself has
become consciousness, continuation of ages, creation or growth
of ever new lobes, re-creation of matter as with styrene. The
screen itself is the cerebral membrane where immediate and
direct confrontations take place between the past and the future,
the inside and the outside, at a distance impossible to determine,
independent of any fixed point (which is perhaps what creates the
strangeness of Stavisky). The image no longer has space and
movement as its primary characteristics but topology and time.

6      The powers of the false

                                   1
Two regimes of the image can be contrasted point by point; an
organic regime and a crystalline regime, or more generally a
kinetic regime and a chronic regime. The first point concerns
descriptions. A description which assumes the independence of
its object will be called ‘organic’. It is not a matter of knowing if the
object is really independent, it is not a matter of knowing if these
are exteriors or scenery. What counts is that, whether they are
scenery or exteriors, the setting described is presented as
independent of the description which the camera gives of it, and
stands for a supposedly pre-existing reality. In contrast, what we
will call a crystalline description stands for its object, replaces it,
both creates and erases it — as Robbe-Grillet puts it — and
constantly gives way to other descriptions which contradict,
displace, or modify the preceding ones. It is now the description
itself which constitutes the sole decomposed and multiplied
object. We see it in a whole variety of areas, the flat views and flat
tints of colour in the musical comedy, the ‘anti-perspective frontal
transparencies’ of Syberberg. Sometimes we go from one regime
to the other, as in An Actor’s Revengeflchikawa) where a yellow fog
blurs and passes across a painted canvas. But the difference is not
between scenery and exteriors. Neo-realism and the new wave
constantly filmed on location, in order to extract from it those
 pure descriptions which develop a creative and destructive
 function. In fact, organic descriptions which presuppose the
independence of a setting serve to define sensory-motor situ­
ations, while crystalline descriptions, which constitute their own
object, refer to purely optical and sound situations detached from
 their motor extension: this is a cinema of the seer and no longer of
the agent [de voyant, nonplus d’actant].
    The second point is a consequence of the first, and concerns the
 relation between the real and the imaginary. In an organic
 description, the real that is assumed is recognizable by its
continuity —even if it is interrupted —by the continuity shots
which establish it and by the laws which determine successions,
 simultaneities and permanences: it is a regime of localizable

The powers of the false                                            127
relations, actual linkages, legal, causal and logical connections. It
is clear that this system includes the unreal, the recollection, the
dream and the imaginary but as contrast. Thus the imaginary will
appear in the forms of caprice and discontinuity, each image
being in a state of disconnection with another into which it is
transformed. This will be a second pole of existence, which will be
defined by pure appearance to consciousness, and no longer by
legal connections. Images of this type will be actualized in
consciousness, in accordance with the needs of the present actual
or the crises of the real. A film may be entirely made up of
dream-images; these will retain their capacity for perpetual
disconnection and change which contrasts them with real-images.
The organic system will, therefore, consist of these two modes of
existence as two poles in opposition to each other: linkages of
actuals from the point of view of the real, and actualizations in
consciousness from the point of view of the imaginary. The
crystalline regime is completely different: the actual is cut off
from its motor linkages, or the real from its legal connections, and
the virtual, for its part, detaches itself from its actualizations,
starts to be valid for itself. The two modes of existence are now
combined in a circuit where the real and the imaginary, the actual
and the virtual, chase after each other, exchange their roles and
become indiscernible.1 It is here that we may speak the most
precisely of crystal-image: the coalescence of an actual image and
its virtual image, the indiscernibility of two distinct images.
 Passages from one regime to the other, from the organic to the
crystalline, can take place imperceptibly or there can be constant
overlapping (Mankiewicz, for instance). There are none the less
 two regimes which differ in nature.
   The third point no longer concerns description, but narration.
 Organic narration consists of the development of sensory-motor
 schemata as a result of which the characters react to situations or
 act in such a way as to disclose the situation. This is a truthful
 narration in the sense that it claims to be true, even in fiction. Such
 a regime is complex because it can produce interventions from
 breaks (ellipses), insertions of recollections and dreams, and
 above all because it implies a certain usage of speech as a
 development factor. However, we are not yet considering the
 specific nature of this factor. We simply note that the sensory-
 motor schema is concretely located in a ‘hodological space’ (Kurt
 Lewin), which is defined by a field of forces, oppositions and
 tensions between these forces, resolutions of these tensions

128                                                       Cinema 2
according to the distribution of goals, obstacles, means, detours.
The corresponding abstract form is Euclidean space, because this
is the setting in which tensions are resolved according to a prin­
ciple of economy, according to the so-called laws of extremum, of
minimum and maximum: for example, the simplest route, the
most appropriate detour, the most effective speech, the mini­
mum means for a maximum effect. This economy of narration,
then, appears both in the concrete shape of the action-image and
hodological space and in the abstract figure of the movementimage and Euclidean space. Movements and actions may present
many obvious anomalies, breaks, insertions, superimpositions
and decompositions; they none the less obey laws which are based
on the distribution of centres of forces in space. We can say in
general that time is the object of an indirect representation in so
far as it is a consequence of action, is dependent on movement
and is inferred from space. Hence, no matter how disordered it is,
it remains in principle a chronological time.
   Crystalline narration is quite different, since it implies a coll­
apse of sensory-motor schemata. Sensory-motor situations have
given way to pure optical and sound situations to which char­
acters, who have become seers, cannot or will not react, so great is
their need to ‘see’ properly what there is in the situation. This is
the Dostoevskian condition as taken up by Kurosawa: in the most
pressing situations, The Idiot feels the need to see the terms of a
problem which is more profound than the situation, and even
more pressing (the same is true for most of Kurosawa’s films).
But, in Ozu, in neo-realism and in the new wave, vision is no
longer even a presupposition added to action, a preliminary
which presents itself as a condition; it occupies all the room and
takes the place of action. Thus movement can tend to zero, the
character, or the shot itself, remain immobile: rediscovery of the
fixed shot. But this is not what is important, because movement
may also be exaggerated, be incessant, become a world move­
ment, a Brownian movement, a trampling, a to-and-fro, a multi­
plicity of movements on different scales. What is important is that
the anomalies of movement become the essential point instead of
being accidental or contingent. This is the era of false continuity
shots as inaugurated by Dreyer.2 In other words crystalline nar­
ration will fracture the complementarity of a lived hodological
space and a represented Euclidean space. Having lost its sensorymotor connections, concrete space ceases to be organized accord­
ing to tensions and resolutions of tension, according to goals,

The powers of thefalse                                         129
obstacles, means, or even detours. It can be said, from a
perspecdve unconnected with cinema, but which is fully con­
firmed by it: ‘Before hodological space, there is that overlapping
of perspectives which does not allow the grasping of a given object
because there are no dimensions in relation to which the unique
set would be ordered. The fluctuatio animi which precedes
resolute action is not hesitation between several objects or
between several direcdons, but a mobile covering-up of sets which
are incompadble, almost alike and yet disparate.’3 It is here that a
crystalline narration will extend crystalline descriptions, their
repetitions and variations, through a crisis of action. But, at the
same time as concrete space ceases to be hodological, abstract
space ceases to be Euclidean, losing in turn the legal connections
and laws of extremum which governed it. O f course, we realize
the dangers of citing scientific propositions outside their own
sphere. It is the danger of arbitrary metaphor or of forced
application. But perhaps these dangers are averted if we restrict
ourselves to taking from scientific operators a particular conceptualizable character which itself refers to non-scientific areas, and
converges with science without applying it or making it a
metaphor. It is in this sense that we can talk about Riemanian
spaces in Bresson, in neo-realism, in the new wave and in the New
York school, of quantum spaces in Robbe-Grillet, of probabilistic
and topological spaces in Resnais, of crystallized spaces in Herzog
and Tarkovsky. We say, for example, that there is Riemanian
space when the connecting of parts is not predetermined but can
take place in many ways: it is a space which is disconnected, purely
optical, sound or even tactile (in the style of Bresson). There are
also empty and amorphous spaces which lose their Euclidean
co-ordinates, in the style of Ozu or Antonioni. There are
crystallized spaces, when the landscapes become hallucinatory in
a setting which now retains only crystalline seeds and crystallizable materials.
   Now what characterizes these spaces is that their nature cannot
be explained in a simply spatial way. They imply non-localizable
relations. These are direct presentations of time. We no longer
have an indirect image of time which derives from movement, but
a direct time-image from which movement derives. We no longer
have a chronological time which can be overturned by move­
ments which are contingently abnormal; we have a chronic
non-chronological time which produces movements necessarily
‘abnormal’, essentially ‘false’. It can also be said that montage

130                                                          Cinema 2
tends to disappear in favour of the sequence shot, with or without
depth. But this is not true in principle, and montage remains in
most cases the essential cinematographic act. It simply changes its
sense: instead of composing movement-images in such a way that
an indirect image of time emerges from them, it decomposes the
relations in a direct time-image in such a way that all the possible
movements emerge from it. It is not recollections or dreams
which determine these chronic relations. Recollection- or dreamimages are on the way to actualization in sensory-motor schemata,
and presuppose their broadening or weakening, but not their
breaking in favour of something else. If time appears direcdy, it is
in de-actualized peaks of present', it is in virtual sheets of past. The
indirect image of tíme is constructed in the organic regime in
accordance with sensory-motor situations, but the two direct
time-images appear in the crystalline system in consequence of
pure optical and sound situations.
   A fourth point, more complex or more general, follows on
from this. If we take the history of thought, we see that time has
always put the notion of truth into crisis. Not that truth varies
depending on the epoch. It is not the simple empirical content, it
is the form or rather the pure force of time which puts truth into
crisis. Since antiquity this crisis has burst out in the paradox of
‘contingent futures’. If it is true that a naval battle may take place
tomorrow, how are we to avoid one of the true following
consequences: either the impossible proceeds from the possible
(since, if the battle takes place, it is no longer possible that it may
not take place), or the past is not necessarily true (since the battle
could not have taken place).4 It is easy to regard this paradox as a
sophism. It none the less shows the difficulty of conceiving a
direct relation between truth and the form of time, and obliges us
to keep the true away from the existent, in the eternal or in what
imitates the eternal. We have to wait for Leibniz to get the most
ingenious, but also the strangest and most convoluted, solution to
this paradox. Leibniz says that the naval batde may or may not
take place, but that this is not in the same world: it takes place in
one world and does not take place in a different world, and these
two worlds are possible, but are not ‘compossible’ with each
other.’ He is thus obliged to forge the wonderful notion of
incompossibility (very different from contradiction) in order to
resolve the paradox while saving truth: according to him, it is not
the impossible, but only the incompossible that proceeds from the
possible; and the past may be true without being necessarily true.

The powers of thefake                                            131
But the crisis of truth thus enjoys a pause rather than a solution.
For nothing prevents us from affirming that incompossibles
belong to the same world, that incompossible worlds belong to the
same universe: ‘Fang, for example, has a secret; a stranger calls at
his door . . . Fang can kill the intruder, the intruder can kill Fang,
they can both escape, they can both die, and so forth . .. you
arrive at this house, but in one of the possible pasts you are my
enemy, in another, my friend . . .’B This is Borges’s reply to
Leibniz: the straight line as force of time, as labyrinth of time, is
also the line which forks and keeps on forking, passing through
incompossible presents, returning to not-necessarily true pasts.
   A new status of narration follows from this: narration ceases to
be truthful, that is, to claim to be true, and becomes funda­
mentally falsifying. This is not at all a case of ‘each has its own
truth’, a variability of content. It is a power of the false which
replaces and supersedes the form of the true, because it poses the
simultaneity of incompossible presents, or the coexistence of
not-necessarily true pasts. Crystalline description was already
reaching the indiscernibility of the real and the imaginary, but the
falsifying narration which corresponds to it goes a step further
and poses inexplicable differences to the present and alternatives
which are undecidable between true and false to the past. The
truthful man dies, every model of truth collapses, in favour of the
new narration. We have not mentioned the author who is
essential in this regard: it is Nietzsche, who, under the name of
‘will to power’, substitutes the power of the false for the form of
the true, and resolves the crisis of truth, wanting to settle it once
and for all, but, in opposition to Leibniz, in favour of the false and
its ardstic, creative power . . .
   From the novel to the cinema, Robbe-Grillet’s work testifies to
the power of the false as principle of production of images. This is
not a simple principle of reflection or becoming aware: ‘Beware!
this is cinema’. It is a source of inspiration. The images must be
produced in such a way that the past is not necessarily true, or that
the impossible comes from the possible. When Robbe-Grillet
appeals to the detail which falsifies in the image (for instance, The
Man Who Lies should not have the same suit and tie several years
later), we see that the power of the false is also the most general
principle that determines all the relationships in the direct
time-image. In one world, two characters know each other, in
another world they don’t know each other, in another one the
first knows the second, in another, finally, the second knows the

132                                                       Cinema 2
first. O r two characters betray each other, only the first betrays
the second, neither betrays, the first and second are the same
person who betrays himself under two different names: contrary
to what Leibniz believed, all these worlds belong to the same
universe and constitute modifications of the same story. Nar­
ration is no longer a truthful narration which is linked to real
(sensory-motor) descriptions. Description becomes its own object
and narration becomes temporal and falsifying at exactly the
same time. The formation of the crystal, the force of time and the
power of the false are strictly complementary, and constantly
imply each other as the new co-ordinates of the image. There is
no value-judgement here, because this new regime —no less than
the old one — throws up its ready-made formulas, its set
procedures, its laboured and empty applications, its failures, its
conventional and ‘second-hand’ examples offered to us as
masterpieces. What is interesting is the new status of the image,
this new type of narration-description in so far as it initially
inspires very different great authors.7 All this could be summed
up by saying that the forger becomes the character of the cinema:
not the criminal, the cowboy, the psycho-social man, the historical
hero, the holder of power, etc., as in the action-image, but the
forger pure and simple, to the detriment of all action. The forger
could previously exist in a determinate form, liar or traitor, but he
now assumes an unlimited figure which permeates the whole film.
He is simultaneously the man of pure descriptions and the maker
of the crystal-image, the indiscernibility of the real and the
imaginary; he passes into the crystal, and makes the direct
time-image visible; he provokes undecidable alternatives and
inexplicable differences between the true and the false, and
thereby imposes a power of the false as adequate to time, in
contrast to any form of the true which would control time. The
Man Who Lies is one of Robbe-Grillet’s finest films: this is not a
localized liar, but an unrealizable and chronic forger in paradox­
 ical spaces. We would also say that Stavisky is not just one film
among others in Resnais’ work: even if it is not the most
 important, it contains the secret of the others, a bit like Henry
James’s ‘The Figure in the Carpet’. We might also select from
 Godard a film which is even more minor yet crucial, because it
 presents in a systematic and concise way what will be the constant
 inspiration for all his work, a power of the false which Godard was
 able to impose as a new style and which moves from pure
 descriptions to falsifying narration from the point of view of a

The powers of thefalse                                             133
direct time-image: we mean Le grand escroc, a free interpretation
of an episode in Herman Melville’s great novel." The Man Who Lies
and Stavisky would also be like Le grand escroc' they would together
form the simplified, overblown, provocative, badly received,
‘badly viewed and reviewed’ manifesto of the new cinema.
  Truthful narration is developed organically, according to legal
connecdons in space and chronological relations in time. O f
course, the elsewhere may be close to the here, and the former to
the present; but this variability of places and moments does not
call the relations and connections into question. They rather
determine its terms or elements, so that narration implies an
inquiry or testimonies which connect it to the true. The investi­
gator and witnesses may even take on an autonomous and explicit
shape, as in literally ‘judicial’ films. But, whether explicitly or not,
narration always refers to a system of judgement: even when
acquittal takes place due to the benefit of the doubt, or when the
guilty is so only because of fate. Falsifying narration, by contrast,
frees itself from this system; it shatters the system of judgem ent
because the power of the false (not error or doubt) affects the
investigator and the witness as much as the person presumed
guilty. ‘In Stavisky the testimonies come from the very living of the
character who refutes them. Then, within these testimonies,
other witnesses appear, who are already talking about a dead
man."’ The point is that the elements themselves are constantly
changing with the relations of time into which they enter, and the
terms with their connections. Narration is constantly being
completely modified, in each of its episodes, not according to
subjecdve variations, but as a consequence of disconnected places
and de-chronologized moments. There is a fundamental reason
for this new situation: contrary to the form of the true which is
unifying and tends to the identification of a character (his
discovery or simply his coherence), the power of the false cannot
be separated from an irreducible multiplicity. ‘I is another’ [Je est
un autre'] has replaced Ego = Ego.
   The power of the false exists only from the perspective of a
series of powers, always referring to each other and passing into
one another. So that investigators, witnesses and innocent or
guilty heroes will participate in the same power of the false the
degrees of which they will embody, at each stage of the narration.
Even ‘the truthful man ends up realizing that he has never
stopped lying’ as Nietzsche said. The forger will thus be insepar­
able from a chain of forgers into whom he metamorphoses.

134                                                       Cinema 2
There is no unique forger, and, if the forger reveals something, it
is the existence behind him of another forger, if only the state as
in the financial operations in Stavisky or in Le grand, escroc. The
truthful man will form part of the chain, at one end like the artist,
at the other end, the nth power of the false. And the only content
of narration will be the presentation of these forgers, their sliding
from one to the other, their metamorphoses into each other. In
literature and philosophy, the two greatest texts to have
developed such chains of forgers or such series of powers are the
last book of Zarathustra, in Nietzsche, and Melville’s novel, The
Confidence Man. The former presents the ‘multiple cry’ of the
higher man who passes through the divine, the two kings, the
man with the leeches, the sorcerer, the last pope, the ugliest man,
the voluntary beggar and the shadow: they are all forgers. The
latter presents a series of forgers which includes a dumb albino, a
legless negro, a man in mourning, a man in grey, a man in a cap, a
man with an account book, a herbal doctor, up to the cosmopoli­
tan with the colourful clothes, the great hypnotist, the ‘meta­
physical scoundrel’, each metamorphosing into the other, all
confronting ‘truthful men’ who are no less false than they are.10
Godard outlines a similar series whose characters will be the
representatives of cinéma-vérité, the policeman, the confidence
man himself and finally the author, the portrait of the artist in a
 fez. Last Year in Marienbad only connected the hypnotized woman
 (the truthful woman?) to the hypnotist provided that it revealed,
 behind, yet another hypnotist. O r the series in Muriel, all forgers
 in some respect. Robbe-Grillet’s series develop in the style of
 Trans-Europe Express'. Elias, the man of the false, connects with
 Eva, the double agent, from the perspective of the gangster Frank
 who presupposes an organization, itself connecting with Jean and
 Marc, the author and his critic, who pass over into Commissioner
 Lorentz. . . Such a construction seems common to some very
 different films and very independent authors. We might mention
 Hugo Santiago’s film The Others, in which Borges and Casares
 collaborated: after the death of his son, the bookseller metamor­
 phoses into a series of forgers, the magician, the man with the
 wand, the man in the mirror, and the son himself, who constitute
 the whole narration, whilst the camera jum ps from point to point
 to carry out pure descriptions (the empty observatory). Every­
 where it is the metamorphoses of the false which replace the form
 of the true.
    This is the essential point: how the new regime of the image

The powers of thefalse                                              135
(the direct time-image) works with pure crystalline optical and
sound descriptions, and falsifying, purely chronic narrations.
Description stops presupposing a reality and narration stops
referring to a form of the true at one and the same time: hence
Agnès Varda’s Documenteur, where the documentary describes
situations which are now only optical and of sound (walls, the
city), for a story which now invokes only the abolition of the true,
following the disconnected gestures of the heroine. Undoubtedly
each great author has his own way of conceiving description,
narration and their relationships." The visual and the spoken
also enter into new relations each time. For, as we shall see, a third
element now intervenes, which is the story, distinct from descrip­
tion and narration. But, to remain with these two instances, we
must propose that they form the framework which, after the new
wave, is indispensable. The neo-realist resolution still retained a
reference to a form of the true, although it profoundly renewed
it, and certain authors were freed from it in their development
(Fellini, and even Visconti). But the new wave deliberately broke
with the form of the true to replace it by the powers of life,
cinematographic powers considered to be more profound. If we
look for the inheritance of the new wave or the influence of
Godard in certain recent films, we immediately see characteristics
which are sufficient to define its most obvious aspect. Bergala and
Limosin’s Favx-fuyants tells the story of a man in a car who
accidentally runs over another man and makes off, then makes
enquiries and enters into closer and closer relation with the
daughter of his victim without us knowingwhat he wants. Butthe
narration does not develop organically, it is rather as if the
offence of making off was sliding along a chain, metamorphosing
each time, following the characters like so many forgers each of
whom comes up with an excuse [opère un faux-fuyant] for his own
purposes (we can count eight in all), until the offence is reversed,
and the original witness in turn becomes the offender whom a
final offence of flight will leave to die in the snow, whilst the circuit
is completed by a telephone call which reports this death to the
first character. Now, such a falsifying narration appears to be
intercut with strange scenes whose sole function is pure descrip­
tion; the man telephones the girl, who is baby-sitting, simply for
her to describe the flat where she is; then he asks the girl to come
and watch him, for no reason, when there is strictly nothing to
see, when he is preparing to go into the cinema with a girlfriend;
 and the girl will repay him this ‘politeness’, asking him to be there

136                                                        Cinema 2
when she in turn is simply out walking with a girlfriend. Doillon’s
Lapirate proceeds quite differently, but on the same basis: the film
presents us with a passion between three characters who want to
be ‘j udged’, but who simply fall under the purely descriptive gaze
of a litde girl, and into the plot of a detective who wonders which
story he will be able to draw from it. Passion becomes the essential
element of this cinema because, as against action, it ties falsifying
narration to pure descriptions.
   If there is a unity to the new German cinema — Wenders,
Fassbinder, Schmid, Schroeter, or Schlondorff —it is also here, as
a result of the war, in the constantly variable link between these
elements: spaces reduced to their own descriptions (city-deserts
or places which are constantly being destroyed), direct present­
ations of an oppressive, useless and unsummonable time which
haunt the characters; and, from one pole to the other, the powers
of the false which weave a narration, in so far as they take effect in
‘false movements’. The German passion has become fear, but fear
is also man’s final reason, his nobility announcing something new,
the creation which comes from fear as a noble passion. If we were
looking for an example not to sum up all the others, but among
others, it would be precisely Schlondorffs Circle of Deceit in a
devastated and divided Beirut, a man from a different past,
caught in a chain of forgers, blankly watching the movement of a
windscreen wiper.
   Semiology of a linguistic inspiration, semiocritique, has
addressed the problem of falsifying narrations as part of rich and
complex studies of the ‘dysnarradve’.12But, since it identified the
cinematographic image with an utterance, and every sequence
with a narration in general, the differences between narrations
could come only from language processes which constituted an
intellectual structure underlying the images. What constituted
this structure was the syntagm and the paradigm, which were
both complementary, but under conditions which meant that the
second remained weak and undetermined while the first alone
was decisive in traditional narration (Christian Metz). Hence, it
only needs the paradigm to become crucial to the structural
order, or the structure to become ‘serial’, for narration to lose the
accumulative, homogeneous and identifiable character that it
owed to the primacy of the syntagm. ‘Grand syntagmatics’ is
overtaken, the Great Lady is dead, subverted, and the minor
elements eat away at her or make her multiply. New syntagms
may arise (for example, the ‘projective syntagms’ of Chateau and

The powers of the false                                            137
Jost), but they show the change in predominance. The cinema is
always narrative, and more and more narrative, but it is dysnarrative in so far as narration is affected by repetitions, permu­
tations and transformations which are explicable in detail by the
new structure. However, a pure semiotics is unable to follow in
the tracks of this semiology, because there is no narration (nor
description) which is as ‘given’ of images. The diversity of
narrations cannot be explained by the avatars of the signifier, by
the states of a linguistic structure which is assumed to underlie
images in general. It relates only to perceptible forms of images
and to corresponding sensory signs which presuppose no nar­
ration but from which derives one narration rather than another.
 Perceptible types cannot be replaced by the processes of lan­
guage. It is in this sense that falsifying narration depends directly
on the time-image, on opsigns and chronosigns, whilst traditional
 narration relates to forms of the movement-image and sensory-
 motor signs.

                                  2
Orson Welles is the first: he isolates a direct time-image and
makes the image go over to the power of the false. These two
aspects are undoubtedly closely linked, but recent writers have
attached increasing importance to the second, which culminates
in It’s All True. There is a Nietzscheanism in Welles, as if Welles
were retracing the main points of Nietzsche’s critique of truth:
the ‘true world’ does not exist, and, if it did, would be inaccessible,
impossible to describe, and, if it could be described, would be
useless, superfluous. The true world implies a ‘truthful man’, a
man who wants the truth, but such a man has strange motives, as
if he were hiding another man in him, a revenge: Othello wants
the truth, but out of jealousy, or, worse, out of revenge for being
black, and Vargas, the epitome of the truthful man, for a long
 time seems indifferent to the fate of his wife, engrossed in the
archives in amassing proofs against his enemy. The truthful man
in the end wants nothing other than to judge life; he holds up a
superior value, the good, in the name of which he will be able to
judge, he is craving to judge, he sees in life an evil, a fault which is
 to be atoned for: the moral origin of the notion of truth. In the
 Nietzschean fashion, Welles has constantly battled against the

138                                                        Cinema 2
 system of judgement: there is no value superior to life, life is not
 to be judged or justified, it is innocent, it has ‘the innocence of
 becoming’, beyond good and evil. . .IS
    This problem of judgem ent is no less familiar to the cinema
 than to the theatre, and has undergone a complex evolution.
 Since expressionism, it is the struggle between good and evil, as
 between light and darkness, that constitutes the metaphysics of
 the true (find truth in light and atonement). But Lang’s position is
 already unique because he creates a human rather than Faustian
 dimension of evil, whether in the shape of a hypnotic genius
 (Mabuse), or of irresistible impulse (M ). This time the quesdon of
 truth, that is, of tribunal and judgement, will reveal its full
 ambiguity: M can be tried by a court of thieves which is hardly
 motivated by truth. And the evolution accelerates when Lang
 moves to America and finds there a genre of literally judicial films
 whose assumptions he will renew. It is not simply a matter of
 pointing out the difficulty of reaching the true, taking into
 account the shortcomings of the investigation and of those who
judge (this will again be the case in Lumet’s Twelve Angry Men). In
 Lang, and also in Preminger, it is the very possibility of judging
 which is called into quesdon. For Lang, it is as if there is no truth
 any more, but only appearances. The American Lang becomes
 the greatest film-maker of appearances, of false images (hence
 the evolution of the Mabuses). Everything is appearance, and yet
 this novel state transforms rather than suppresses the system of
judgement. In fact appearance is what betrays itself; the great
 moments in Lang are those where a character betrays himself.
 Appearances betray themselves, not because they would give way
 to a more profound truth, but simply because they reveal
 themselves as non-true; the character makes a blunder, he knows
 the visitor’s first name (Beyond a Reasonable Doubt) or he knows
 German (Hangmen Die Too). In these conditions, it remains
 possible to make new appearances arise, in the light of which the
 first ones will bejudicable and judged. The resistance fighters, for
 instance, will bring out false witnesses who will get the traitor who
 knew German condemned by the Gestapo. The system of
judgem ent thus undergoes a great transformation, because it
 moves within the condidons which determine the relations on
 which appearances depend: Lang invents a Protagoras-style
 relativism where judgem ent expresses the ‘best’ point of view,
 that is, the; relation under which appearances have a chance of
 being turned around to the benefit of an individual or of a

The powers of the false                                               139
humanity of higher value (judgement as ‘revenge’, or
displacement of appearances). Ultimately, we can understand the
encounter betweenLang and Brecht and the misunderstandings
of this encounter. For, in Lang as in Brecht, judgem ent can no
longer be direcdy exercised in the image, but passes to the side of
the viewer, to which the conditions of possibility of judging the
image itself are given. What in Brecht rested on a reality of
contradictions, in Lang, in contrast, rests on a relativity of
appearances.14 In both of them, the system of judgement, if it
undergoes a crisis, is none the less saved and transformed. Things
are very different in Welles (even though he made a ‘Langian’,
but disowned, film: The Stranger, where the character betrays
himself). In Welles, the system of judgem ent becomes definitively
impossible, even and especially for the viewer. The ransacking of
the judge’s office in The Lady from Shanghai, and especially the
infinite sham of judgem ent in The Trial, will be evidence of this
new impossibility. Welles constantly constructs characters who
are unjudicable and who have not to be judged, who evade any
possible judgement. If the ideal of truth crumbles, the relations of
appearance will no longer be sufficient to maintain the possibility
of judgement. In Nietzsche’s phrase, ‘with the real world we have
also abolished the apparent world’.l3’
   What remains? There remain bodies, which are forces, nothing
but forces. But force no longer refers to a centre, any more than it
confronts a setting or obstacles. It only confronts other forces, it
refers to other forces, that it affects or that affect it. Power (what
Nietzsche calls ‘will to power’ and Welles, ‘character’) is this power
to affect and be affected, this relation between one force and
others. This power is always fulfilled, and this relation is
necessarily carried out, even if in a variable manner according to
the forces which are present.16 We already sense that short,
cut-up and piecemeal montage, and the long sequence shot serve
the same purpose. The one presents bodies in a successive way,
each of which exercises its force or experiences that of another:
‘each shot shows a blow, a counter-blow, a blow received, a blow
struck’.17 The other presents in a simultaneous way a relation of
forces in its variability, in its instability, its proliferation of centres
and multiplication of vectors (the scene of the questioning in
Touch of Evil).'* In both cases, there is the shock of forces, in the
image or of the images between themselves. Sometimes a short
montage reproduces a sequence shot, through cutting, as in the
battle in Chimes at Midnight, or a sequence shot produces a short

140                                                            Cinema 2
montage, through constant reframing, as in Touch of Evil. We
have seen how Resnais rediscovered this complementarity, by
other means.
    Is this to say that, in life, everything is a matter of forces? Yes, if
it is understood that the relation of forces is not quantitative, but
necessarily implies certain ‘qualities’. There are forces which are
now able to respond to others only in a single, uniform and
invariable way: the scorpion in M r Arkadin knows only how to
string, and stings the frog that carries him over the water, even if
it means death by drowning. Variability thus survives in the
relation of forces, since the scorpion’s sting turns against itself,
when it is directed in this case at the frog. None the less, the
scorpion is the type of a force which no longer knows how to
metamorphose itself according to the variations of what it can
affect and what it can be affected by. Bannister is a big scorpion
who knows only how to sting. Arkadin knows only how to kill, and
Quinlan how to fix the evidence. This is a type of exhausted force,
even when it has remained quantitatively very large, and it can
only destroy and kill, before destroying itself, and perhaps in
order to kill itself. It is here that it rediscovers a centre, but one
which coincides with death. No matter how large it is, it is
exhausted because it no longer knows how to transform itself. It is
thus descending, decadent and degenerate: it represents im­
 potence in bodies, that is, that precise point where the ‘will to
 power’ is nothing but a will-to-dominate, a being for death, which
 thirsts for its own death, as long as it can pass through that of
others. Welles multiples the list of these all-powerful impotents:
 Bannister and his artificial limbs, Quinlan and his cane; Arkadin
and his helplessness when he no longer has an aeroplane; Iago,
 the impotent par excellence.'9These are men of revenge: not in the
 same way, however, as the truthful man who claimed to judge life
 in the name of higher values. They, on the contrary, take
 themselves to be higher men, these are higher men who claim to
judge life by their own standards, by their own authority. But is
 this not the same spirit of revenge in two forms: Vargas, the
 truthful man who invokes the laws for judging, but also his
 double, Quinlan, who gives himself the right to judge without
 law; Othello, the man of duty and virtue, but also his double,
 Iago, who takes revenge by nature and perversion? It is what
 Nietzsche called the stages of nihilism, the spirit of revenge in
 various shapes. Behind the truthful man, who judges life from
 the perspective of supposedly higher values, there is the sick man,

The powers of thefabe                                                141
 ‘the man sick with himself, who judges life from the perspective
 of his sickness, his degeneration and his exhaustion. And this is
 perhaps better than the truthful man, because a life of sickness is
 still life, it contrasts life with death, rather than contrasting it with
 ‘higher values’ . . . Nietzsche said: behind the truthful man, who
judges life, there is the sick man, sick with life itself. And Welles
 adds: behind the frog, the epitome of the truthful animal, there is
 the scorpion, the animal sick with itself. The first is an idiot and
 the second is a bastard.2" They are, however, complementary as
 two figures of nihilism, two figures of the will to power.
    Does this not amount to restoring a system of judgement?
 Welles constantly says of Quinlan, Arkadin, etc., that he ‘detests
 them morally’ (even if he does not detest them ‘humanly’,
 according to the amount of Life they have kept).21 But it is not a
 matter of judging life in the name of a higher authority which
 would be the good, the true; it is a matter, on the contrary, of
 evaluating every being, every action and passion, even every
 value, in relation to the life which they involve. Affect as
 immanent evaluation, instead of judgem ent as transcendent
 value: ‘I love or I hate’ instead o f ‘I judge’. Nietzsche, who had
 already substituted affect for judgem ent, warned his readers:
 beyond good and evil does not in the least mean beyond the good and
 the bad. This bad is exhausted and degenerating life, all the more
 terrible, and apt to multiply itself. But the good is outpouring,
 ascending life, the kind which knows how to transform itself, to
 metamorphose itself according to the forces it encounters, and
 which forms a constantly larger force with them, always increas­
 ing the power to live, always opening new ‘possibilities’. O f course
 there is no more truth in one life than in the other; there is only
 becoming, and becoming is the power of the false of life, the will
 to power. But there is good and bad, that is, noble and base.
 According to physicists, noble energy is the kind which is capable
 of transforming itself, while the base kind can no longer do so.
 There is will to power on both sides, but the latter is nothing more
 than will-to-dominate in the exhausted becoming of life, while the
 former is artistic will or ‘virtue which gives’, the creation of new
 possibilities, in the outpouring becoming. The so-called higher
 men are base or bad. But the good has only one name; it is
 ‘generosity’, and this is the trait by which Welles defines his
 favourite character, Falstaff; it is also the trait which we suppose is
 dominant in Don Quixote’s eternal project. If becoming is the
 power of the false, then the good, the generous, the noble is what

142                                                        Cinema 2
raises the false to the nth power or the will to power to the level of
artistic becoming. Falstaff and Don Quixote may appear to be
braggarts or to be pitiful, history having passed them by; they are
experts in metamorphoses of life; they oppose becoming to
history. Incommensurable to any judgement, they have the
innocence of becoming.22 And it is clear that becoming is always
innocent, even in crime, even in the exhausted life in so far as it is
still a becoming. But only the good allows itself to be exhausted by
life rather than exhausting it, always putting itself at the service of
what is reborn from life, what metamorphoses and creates. Out of
becoming it makes a Being, so protean, instead of despatching it
into non-being, from the height of a uniform and fixed being.
There are two states of life which are in opposition at the heart of
immanent becoming, and not one instance which would claim to
be superior to becoming, whether in order to judge life, or to
appropriate it, and in any event to exhaust it. What Welles sees in
Falstaff and Don Quixote is the ‘goodness’ of life in itself, a
strange goodness which carries the living being to creation. It is in
this sense that we can talk about an authentic or a spontaneous
Nietzscheanism in Welles.
   Nevertheless, in becoming, the earth has lost all centre, not only
in itself, but in that it no longer has a centre around which to turn.
Bodies no longer have centres except that of their death when
they are exhausted and return to the earth to dissolve there.
Force no longer has a centre precisely because it is inseparable
from its relation to other forces: so, as Didier Goldschmidt said,
short shots constantly topple to right and left and the sequence
shot likewise throws up a jum ble of vanishing centres (the
opening of Touch of Evil). Weights have lost the centres of
equilibrium around which they were distributed; masses have lost
the centres of gravity around which they were ordered, forces
have lost the dynamic centres around which they organize space;
movements themselves have lost the centres of revolution around
which they develop. There is here, in Welles, a mutation which is
as much cinematographic as metaphysical. For what contrasts
with the ideal of truth is not movement: movement remains
 perfectly consistent with the true while it presents invariants,
 point of gravity of the moving body, privileged points through
which it passes and point of fixity in relation to which it moves.
This is why the movement-image, in its very essence, is answerable to the effect of truth which it invokes while movement
 preserves its centres. And this is what we have been trying to say

The powers of thefalse                                          143
from the beginning of this study: a cinematographic mutation
occurs when aberrations of movement take on their indepen­
dence; that is, when the moving bodies and movements lose their
invariants. There then occurs a reversal where movement ceases
to demand the true and where time ceases to be subordinate to
movement: both at once. Movement which isfundamentally decentred
becomes false movement, and time which is fundamentally liberated
becomes power of the false which is now brought into effect in false
movement (Arkadin always already there). Welles seems to be the
first to have opened this breach, where neo-realism and the new
wave were to be introduced with completely different methods.
Welles, through his conception of bodies, forces and movement,
constructs a world which has lost all motor centre or ‘configur­
ation’; the earth.
   Nevertheless we have seen that Welles’s cinema kept some
essential centres (and it is on this very point that Resnais parts
company from Welles). But what we have to evaluate here is the
radical change to which Welles subjected the very notion of
centre. The question of depth of field already took up in a new
way a transformation of painting in the seventeenth century. It is
possible that Welles’s cinema has been able to re-create, for the
use of our modern world, a transformation of thought which
originally took place in that distant century. If we follow an
important analysis by Michel Serres, the seventeenth century was
not the ‘classical’ age of the ideal of the true, but the baroque age
par excellence which was inseparable from what is called classical
and where truth passed through a definitive crisis. It was no
longer a question of knowing where the centre was, the sun or the
earth, because the primary question became ‘Is there a centre or
not at all?’ All the centres, of gravity, equilibrium, force,
revolution, in short, of configuration, were collapsing. It was at
that point that a restoration of centres undoubtedly occurred, but
at the price of a profound change, of a great evolution of the
sciences and the arts. On the one hand, the centre became purely
optical', the point became point of view. This ‘perspectivism’ was
not defined by variation of external points of view on a supposedly
invariable object (the ideal of the true would be preserved). Here,
on the contrary, the point of view was constant, but always
internal to the different objects which were henceforth presented
as the metamorphosis of one and the same thing in the process of
becoming. This was projective geometry, which lodged the eye at the
apex of the cone and gave us ‘projections’ as variable as the

144                                                          Cinema 2
sectioned planes, circle, ellipse, hyperbola, point and straight
lines, the object itself, at the limit, being only the connection of its
own projections, the collection or series of its own metamor­
phoses. Perspectives and projections —these are neither truth nor
appearance.
   However, this new perspective does not yet give us the means of
establishing a true progression in the figures so described, or of
spacing out the volumes on the flat sections. Thus we must, on the
other hand, link it to the theory of shadows, which is, as it were, the
inverse of the projective: the luminous source now occupies the
apex of the cone, the body projected is the opaque and the
projections are produced by reliefs or bands of shadow.23 These
are the two aspects which form an ‘architecture of vision’. We see
them particularly in Welles’s art; and they give us the final reason
for the complementarity between short montage and the se­
quence shot. Short montage presents flat and flattened images
which are so many perspectives and projections, in the strong
sense, and which express the metamorphoses of an immanent
thing or being. Hence the appearance of a succession of
‘numbers’ which often marks Welles’s films; for example, the
different witnesses to the past in Mr Arkadin could be considered
as a series of projections of Arkadin himself, who is simultane­
ously what is projected on to each plane and the commanding
point of view according to which we pass from one projection to
the next; similarly in The Trial all the characters, policemen,
colleagues, student, concierge, lawyer, litde girls, painter and
priest, consdtute the projective series of a single instance which
does not exist outside its metamorphoses. But, from the other
aspect, the sequence shot with depth of field powerfully empha­
sizes volumes and reliefs, the bands of shadow from which bodies
emerge and into which they return, oppositions and combina­
tions of light and dark, violent stripes which affect bodies when
they are in a see-through space (The Ladyfrom. Shanghai, The Trial',
a whole neo-expressionism which has rid itself both of its moral
assumptions and the ideal of the true).24 One might say that
Welles subjected the notion of centre to a double transformation
which established the new cinema: the centre ceased to be
sensory-motor and, on the one hand, became optical, determin­
ing a new regime of description; on the other hand, at the same
time, it became luminous, determining a new progression of
narration. The descriptive or projective, and the narrative or
gloomy .. .

The powers of the false                                          145
    By raising the false to power, life freed itself of appearances as
well as truth: neither true nor false, an undecidable alternative,
but power of the false, decisive will. It is Welles who, beginning
with The Lady from Shanghai, imposes one single character, the
forger. But the forger exists only in a series of forgers who are his
metamorphoses, because the power itself exists only in the form
of a series of powers which are its exponents. There is always a
character destined to betray the other (Welles stresses that the
prince must betray Falstaff, Menzies must betray Quinlan),
because the other is already a traitor, and betrayal is the link
between forgers throughout the series. Since Welles has a strong
personality, we forget that his constant theme, precisely as a result
of this personality, is to be a person no longer, in the manner of
Virginia Woolfs Mrs Dalloway.25 A becoming, an irreducible
multiplicity, characters or forms are now valid only as trans­
formations of each other. And this is the diabolical trio of The Lady
from Shanghai, the strange relay-characters of Mr Arkadin, the
chain which unites those in Touch of Evil, the unlimited trans­
formation for those of The Trial, the journey of the false which
constantly passes through the king, his son and Falstaff, all three
imposters and usurpers in some way, culminating in the scene
where the roles are exchanged. It is finally the great series in It’s
All True, which is the manifesto for all of Welles’s work, and his
reflection on cinema. F for Falstaff, but above all Fforfake. Welles
certainly has a conscious affinity with Herman Melville, even
 more important than his less conscious affinity with Nietzsche. It
is in It’s All True that Welles constructs a series of forgers as
extensive and perfect as that in Melville’s The Confidence Man,
Welles scrupulously playing the role of the cosmopolitan hyp­
 notist. This great series of Welles, the story that is continually
being modified, may be summed up as follows: 1. ‘presentation of
 Oja Kadar, whom all men turn to look at in the street’; 2.
 ‘presentation of Welles as conjuror’; 3. presentation of the
journalist, author of a book about a forger of paintings, but also of
 false memoirs of Hughes, the millionaire forger with a multipli­
 city of doubles, concerning whom we do not know if he has
 himself harmed the journalist; 4. conversation or exchange
between the journalist and the forger of paintings; 5. interven­
 tion of Welles who assures us that, for an hour, the viewer will
 neither see nor hear anything else false; 6. Welles recounts his
 life, and reflects on man in front of Chartres Cathedral; 7. Oja
 Radar’s affair with Picasso at the end of which Welles arrives to

146                                                        Cinema 2
say that the hour has passed and the affair was invented in every
respect.26
   Nevertheless, everything is not equivalent to everything else,
and all the forgers are not all so to the same degree or with the
same power. The truthful man forms part of them, like the frog,
Vargas, or Othello, and Welles in front of Chartres Cathedral: for
he invokes a true world, but the true world itself implies the
truthful man. In itself, it is an inaccessible and useless world. Like
the cathedral, its only quality is to have been made by men. Thus it
is not hidden by appearances; it is it, on the contrary, which hides
appearances and provides them with an alibi. Behind the truthful
man there is the forger, the scorpion, and the one constantly
refers back to the other. The expert in truth gives approval to
Van Megeeren’s false Vermeers precisely because the forger has
created them by reference to the expert’s own criteria. In short,
the forger cannot be reduced to a simple copier, nor to a liar,
because what is false is not simply a copy, but already the model.
Should we not say, then, that the artist, even Vermeer, even
Picasso, is a forger, since he makes a model with appearances,
even if the next artist gives the model back to appearances in
order to make a new model? Where does the ‘bad’ relation of
Elmer the forger of Picasso end and the ‘good’ relation of Picasso
and Velázquez begin? From the truthful man to the artist, the
chain of forgers is long. This is obviously why it is so difficult to
define ‘the’ forger, because we do not take into account his
multiplicity, his ubiquity, and because we are content to refer to a
historical and ultimately chronological time. But everything is
changed in the perspective of time as becoming. What we can
criticize in the forgers, as well as in the truthful man, is their
exaggerated taste for form: they have neither the sense nor the
power of metamorphosis; they reveal an impoverishment of the
vital force [élan vital], of an already exhausted life. The difference
between the forger, the expert and Vermeer is that the first two
barely know how to change. Only the creative ardst takes the
power of the false to a degree which is realized, not in form, but in
transformation. There is no longer either truth or appearance.
There is no longer either invariable form or variable point of view
on to a form. There is a point of view which belongs so much to
the thing that the thing is constantly being transformed in a
becoming idendcal to point of view. Metamorphosis of the true.
What the artist is, is creator of truth, because truth is not to be
achieved, formed, or reproduced; it has to be created. There is no

The powers of thefalse                                          147
other truth than the creation of the New: creativity, emergence,
what Melville called ‘shape’ in contrast to ‘form’. Art is the
continual production of shapes, reliefs and projections. The
truthful man and the forger form part of the same chain, but, in
the end, it is not they who are projected, elevated, or excavated; it
is the artist, creator of the true, in the very place where the false
attains its final power: goodness, generosity. Nietzsche drew up a
list of the characters of the ‘will to power’: the truthful man, then
all the forgers who presuppose him and that he presupposes, the
long, exhausted cohort of ‘superior men’, but, still behind, the
new man, Zarathustra, the artist or outpouring life.27 There is
only a slim chance, so great is the capacity of nihilism to overcome
it, for exhausted life to get control of the New from its birth, and
for completed forms to ossify metamorphosis and to reconstitute
models and copies. The power of the false is delicate, allowing
itself to be recaptured by frogs and scorpions. But it is the only
chance for art or life, the Nietzschean, Melvillian, Bergsonian,
Wellesian chance. . . Kamler’s Chronopolis shows that the
elements of time require an extraordinary encounter with man in
order to produce something new;

                                 3
There would be still a third instance beyond description and
narration: the story [récit]. If we attempt a provisional definition,
as we have done for the other instances, still without taking into
account the special importance of the talkie factor, we believe that
the story in general concerns the subject-object relationship and
the development of this relationship (whilst narration concerned
the development of the sensory-motor schema). The model of
truth thus finds its full expression, not in the sensory-motor
connection, but in the ‘adequation’ of the subject and the object.
We must, however, specify what the subject and the object are in
the conditions of the cinema. According to convention, what the
camera ‘sees’ is called objective, and what the character sees is
called subjective. Such a convention has a place only in the
cinema, not in the theatre. Now it is essential that the camera sees
the character himself: it is one and the same character who
sometimes sees and sometimes is seen. But it is also the same
camera which gives us the character seen and what the character

148                                                       Cinema 2
sees. We may, then, consider the story as the development of two
kinds of images, objective and subjective, their complex relation
which can go as far as antagonism, but which ought to find
resolution in an identity of the type Ego = Ego; identity of the
character seen and who sees, but equally well identity of the
camera/film-maker who sees the character and is what the
character sees. This identity passes through many trials which
specifically represent the false (confusion between two characters
seen, for example, in Hitchcock, or confusion in what the
character sees, for example, in Ford), but ends up affirming itself
for itself by constituting the True, even if the character has to die
because of it. We might say that the film begins with the
distinction between the two kinds of images, and ends with their
identification, their identity recognized. The variations are in­
finite, because both the distinction and the synthetic identity can
be established in all kinds of ways. The basic conditions of cinema
are none the less here, from the point of view of the veracity of
every possible story.2"
   The distinction between the objective and the subjective, but
also their identification, are brought into question in another
kind of story. Here again, the American Lang was the great
forerunner of a critique of veracity in the story.29 And the critique
was taken up and extended by Welles, starting with Citizen Kane,
where the distinction between the two kinds of images tends to
vanish in what the witnesses have seen, without its being possible
to agree on an identity for the character (‘no trespassing’), nor
even an identity for the film-maker, about which Welles always
had doubts, which he was to push to the limit in It’s All True.
Pasolini, for his part, drew out the consequences of this new
situation in what he called ‘cinema of poetry’, in contrast to the
so-called cinema of prose. In the cinema of poetry, the distinction
between what the character saw subjectively and what the camera
saw objectively vanished, not in favour of one or the other, but
because the camera assumed a subjective presence, acquired an
internal vision, which entered into a relation of simulation
(‘mimesis’) with the character’s way of seeing. It is here, according
to our earlier discussion, that Pasolini discovered how to go
beyond the two elements of the traditional story, the objective,
indirect story from the camera’s point of view and the subjective,
direct story from the character’s point of view, to achieve the very
special form of a ‘free indirect discourse’, of a ‘free, indirect
subjective’. A contamination of the two kinds of image was

The powers of thefalse                                          149
established, so that bizarre visions of the camera (alternation of
different lenses, zoom, extraordinary angles, abnormal move­
ments, halts . . .) expressed the singular visions of the character,
and the latter were expressed in the former, but by bringing the
whole to the power of the false. The story no longer refers to an
 ideal of the true which constitutes its veracity, but becomes a
‘pseudo-story’, a poem, a story which simulates or rather a
simulation of the story.3" Objective and subjective images lose
 their distinction, but also their identification, in favour of a new
circuit where they are wholly replaced, or contaminate each
other, or are decomposed and recomposed. Pasolini brings his
analysis to bear on Antonioni, Bertolucci and Godard, but the
 origin of this transformation of the story is perhaps in Lang and
 Welles (the study of The Immortal Story would be important here).
    We would like to consider an aspect of this new type of story, as
it appears in a quite different area. If we go to the forms which for
a long time challenged fiction, we see that the cinema of reality
sometimes claimed objecdvely to show us real settings, situations
and characters, and sometimes claimed subjectively to show the
 ways of seeing of these characters themselves, the way in which
 they themselves saw their situation, their setting, their problems.
 In short, there was the documentary or ethnographic pole, and
 the investigation or reportage pole. These two poles inspired
 masterpieces and in any case intermingled (Flaherty on one hand,
 and on the other Grierson and Leacock). But, in challenging
 fiction, if this cinema discovered new paths, it also preserved and
 sublimated an ideal of truth which was dependent on cinematographic
fiction itself: there was what the camera sees, what the character
 sees, the possible antagonism and necessary resolution of the two.
 And the character himself retained or acquired a kind of identity
 in so far as he was seen or saw. And the camera/film-maker also
 had his identity, as ethnologist or reporter. It was very important
 to challenge the established fictions in favour of a reality that
 cinema could capture or discover. But fiction was being aban­
 doned in favour of the real, whilst retaining a model of truth
 which presupposed fiction and was a consequence of it. What
 Nietzsche had shown, that the ideal of the true was the most
 profound fiction, at the heart of the real, had not yet been
 discovered by the cinema. The veracity of the story continued to
 be grounded in fiction. When the ideal or model of the true was
 applied to the real, it began to change many things, since the
 camera was being directed to a pre-existing real, but, in another

150                                                        Cinema 2
sense, nothing had changed in the conditions of the story: the
objective and the subjective were displaced, not transformed;
identities were defined in a different way, but remained defined;
the story remained truthful, really-truthful instead of fictionallytruthful. But the veracity of the story had not stopped being a
fiction.
   The break is not between fiction and reality, but in the new
mode of story which affects both of them. A change occurred
around the 1960s, in quite independent places, in the direct
cinema of Cassavetes and Shirley Clarke, in the ‘cinema of the
lived’ of Pierre Perrault, in the 'cinéma-vérité of Jean Rouch.
Thus, when Perrault criticizes all fiction, it is in the sense that it
forms a model of pre-established truth, which necessarily
expresses the dominant ideas or the point of view of the colonizer,
even when it is forged by the film’s author. Fiction is inseparable
from a ‘reverence’ which presents it as true, in religion, in society,
in cinema, in the systems of images. Never has Nietzsche’s dictum,
‘suppress your reverences', been so well understood as by
Perrault. When Perrault is addressing his real characters of
Quebec, it is not simply to eliminate fiction but to free it from the
model of truth which penetrates it, and on the contrary to
rediscover the pure and simple story-telling function which is
opposed to this model. What is opposed to fiction is not the real; it
is not the truth which is always that of the masters or colonizers; it
is the story-telling function of the poor, in so far as it gives the
false the power which makes it into a memory, a legend, a
monster. Hence the white dolphin of Pour la suite du monde, the
caribou of Le pays de la terre sans arbres and above all the luminous
beast, the Dionysus of La bête lumineuse. What cinema must grasp
is not the identity of a character, whether real or fictional, through
his objective and subjective aspects. It is the becoming of the real
character when he himself starts to ‘make fiction’, when he enters
 into ‘the flagrant offence of making up legends’ and so contri­
butes to the invention of his people. The character is inseparable
 from a before and an after, but he reunites these in the passage
 from one state to the other. He himself becomes another, when
 he begins to tell stories without ever being fictional. And the
 film-maker for his part becomes another when there are ‘inter­
 posed’, in this way, real characters, who wholly replace his own
 fictions by their own story-telling. Both communicate in the
 invention of a people. I interposed on behalf of Alexis (Le règne du
jour), and the whole of Quebec, in order to get to know who I was,

The powers of thefalse                                           151
‘in such a way that to speak to myself I just have to let them
speak’.31 This is the simulation of a story, the legend and its
metamorphosis, free indirect discourse of Quebec, a discourse
with a thousand heads ‘litde by litde’. Thus the cinema can call
itself cinéma-vérité, all the more because it will have destroyed
every model of the true so as to become creator and producer of
truth: this will not be a cinema of truth but the truth of cinema.
    This is the sense intended by Jean Rouch when he spoke of
'cinéma-vérité’. Just like Perrault, with reporting investigations,
Rouch had begun with ethnographic films. The evolution of the
two authors would be difficult to explain if we restricted ourselves
to pointing out the impossibility of achieving a raw real; every­
body has always known that the camera has an active effect on
situations, and that characters react to the presence of the
camera, and it hardly troubled Flaherty or Leacock, who already
saw only false problems in it. In Rouch and Perrault, the novelty
has other sources. It begins to be clearly expressed in Rouch in Les
maîtres fous, when the characters in the ritual, possessed, drunk,
foaming and in trances, are first shown in their daily reality where
they are waiters, navvies and labourers, as they become again
after the ceremony. What they were before . . . Conversely, in
Moi un Noir, there are real characters who are shown through the
roles of their story-telling, Dorothy Lamour the little prostitute,
Lemmy Caution the unemployed man from Treichville, even if
they themselves then comment on and correct the function that
they have released.32 In Jaguar, the three characters, especially
the ‘gallant’, share out roles which they are made to confront like
so many legendary powers, by the realities of their journey —the
encounter with the fetishists, the organization of work, the
 making of gold ingots which they lock away and which are useless,
the flying visit to the central market, finally the invention of their
 little business under a title which replaces a ready-made formula
 with a figure capable of making legends: ‘litde by little the bird
 makes his . . . bonnet’. And they will return to their country, like
 ancestors, full of exploits and lies where the least incident
 becomes power. There is always passage from one state to
 another at the heart of the character, as when the hunter baptizes
 a lion the American, or when the travellers in Cocorico MoTisieur
 Poulet encounter the female devil. To restrict ourselves to these
 masterpieces, we notice in the first place that the character has
 ceased to be real or fictional, in so far as he has ceased to be seen
 objectively or to see subjectively: it is a character who goes over

152                                                         Cinema 2
crossings and frontiers because he invents as a real character, and
becomes all the more real because he has been better at inventing.
Dionysos is a great synthesis by Rouch: the image of industrial
society which brings together a Hungarian mechanic, an Ivory
Coast riveter, a West Indian metalworker, a Turkish carpenter, a
German woman mechanic, plunges into a before that is Dionysian
haunted by the three maenads, the white, the black and the
yellow, but this before is also an after, like the post-industrial
horizon where one worker has become a flautist, another a
tambourine player, cellist, soprano, forming the Dionysian
cortège which reaches the forest of Meudon. The ‘ciné-trance’
and its music are a temporalization of the image which never stays
in the present, continually crossing the limit in both directions, all
driven by a teacher who turns out to be a forger, nothing but a
forger, the power of the false of Dionysus himself. If the
real-fictional alternative is so completely surpassed it is because
the camera instead of marking out a fictional or real present,
constantly reattaches the character to the before and after which
constitute a direct time-image. The character must first of all be
real if he is to affirm fiction as a power and not as a model: he has
to start to tell stories in order to affirm himself all the more as real
and not fictional. The character is continually becoming another,
and is no longer separable from this becoming which merges with
a people.
   But what we are saying about the character is also valid in the
second place, and in particular, for the film-maker himself. He
too becomes another, in so far as he takes real characters as
intercessors and replaces his fictions by their own story-telling,
but, conversely, gives these story-tellings the shape of legends,
carrying out their ‘making into legend’. Rouch makes his own
free indirect discourse at the same time as his characters make
that of Africa. Perrault makes his own free indirect discourse at
the sametime as his characters make that of Quebec. There is
undoubtedly a big difference in situation between Perrault and
Rouch, a difference which is not simply personal but cinemato­
graphic and formal. For Perrault, the concern is to belong to his
dominated people, and to rediscover a lost and repressed
collective identity. For Rouch, it is a matter of getting out of his
dominant civilization and reaching the premises of another
identity. Hence the possibility of misunderstandings between the
two authors. Nevertheless each one as a film-maker sets off with
the same slender material, camera on the shoulder and

The powers of thefalse                                            153
synchronized tape-recorder; they must become others, with their
characters, at the same time as their characters must become
others themselves. The famous formula, ‘what is suitable for the
documentary is that one knows who one is and whom one is
filming’, ceases to be valid. The Ego = Ego form of idendty (or its
degenerate form, them = them) ceases to be valid for the
characters and for the film-maker, in the real as well as in the
fiction. What allows itself to be glimpsed instead, by profound
degrees, is Rimbaud’s ‘I is another’ \Je est un entre]: Godard said
this in relation to Rouch; not only for the characters themselves,
but for the film-maker who ‘white just like Rimbaud, himself
declares that I is another, that is, me a black.33 When Rimbaud
exclaims, ‘I am of inferior race for all eternity . . . I am a beast, a
negro . ..’, it is in the course of passing through a whole series of
forgers, ‘Merchant you are a negro, magistrate you are a negro,
general you are a negro, mangy old em peror you are a negro .. .’,
up to that highest power of the false which means that a black
must himself become black, through his white roles, whilst the
white here finds a chance of becoming black too (‘I can be
saved .. .’). And, for his part, Perrault has no less a need to
become another so as to join his own people. This is no longer
Birth of a Nation, but constitution or reconstitution of a people,
where the film-maker and his characters become others together
and the one through the other, a collectivity which gradually wins
from place to place, from person to person, from intercessor to
intercessor. I am a caribou, an original. . . ‘I is another’ is the
formation of a story which simulates, of a simulation of a story or
of a story of simulation which deposes the form of the truthful
story. Poetry is what Pasolini held up against prose, but which can
be found in the place that he did not look for it, in the domain of a
cinema presented as direct.34
   In Shirley Clarke or Cassavetes, an analogous phenomenon
occurs, once again with many differences. It is as if the three great
themes were turning and forming their combinations; the
character is continually passing the frontier between the real and
the fictional (the power of the false, the story-telling function), the
film-maker has to reach what the character was ‘before’ and will
be ‘after’; he has to bring together the before and the after in the
incessant passage from one state to the other (the direct timeimage); the becoming of the film-maker and of his character
already belongs to a people, to a community, to a minority whose
expression they practise and set free (free, indirect discourse).

154                                                         Cinema 2
With Shirley Clarke’s The Connexion, the levels of organization
mingle, because the roles of drug-addicts refer to pre-existing
characters who themselves refer alternatively to their role. And in
A Portrait of Jason it is the passage which must be grasped in all its
possible ‘distances’, in relation to the character and to his roles,
but always internal distances, as if the white camera had slid into
the great black forger; the ‘I is another’ of Shirley Clarke consists
in this: that the film that she wanted to make about herself became
the one she made about Jason. What has to be filmed is the
frontier, on condition that this is equally crossed by the film­
maker in one direction and by the real character in the opposite
direction: time is necessary here; a certain time is necessary which
constitutes an integral part of the film.3:1 This is what Cassavetes
was already saying in Shadows and then Faces', what constitutes
part of the film is interesting oneself in the people more than in
the film, in the ‘human problems’ more than in the ‘problems of
mise-en-scène’, so that the people do not pass over to the side of the
camera without the camera having passed over to the side of the
people. In Shadows it is the two white Negroes who constitute the
frontier, and its perpetual crossing in a double reality which is no
longer distinguishable from the film. The frontier can be grasped
only in flight, when we no longer know where it passes, between
the white and the black, but also between the film and the
non-film; it is characteristic of film to be always outside its marks,
breaking with ‘the right distance’, always overflowing ‘the re­
served zone’ where we would have liked to hold it in space and
time.36
   We will see how Godard draws a generalized method of the
image from this; where something ends, where something else
begins, what a frontier is and how to see it, but through crossing
and displacing it endlessly. In Masculin féminin, the fictional
interview with the characters and the real interview with the
actors mix together so that they seem to be speaking to each other,
and to speak for themselves, by speaking to the film-maker.37The
method can be developed only where the camera is constantly
reaching a before or an after in the characters which constitute
the real, at the very point where story-telling is set in motion. ‘To
know what they were before being placed in the picture, and
after . . .’3HFrance tour détour deux enfants already makes use of this
as a principle; ‘Him before, and the story after, or him after and
the story before.’ Godard, who has often acknowledged his debt
to Rouch, increasingly emphasizes this point: the image has to

The powers of thefalse                                             155
include the before and the after; it thus has to bring together in
this way the conditions of a new, direct time-image, instead of
being in the present ‘as in bad films’. It is under these conditions
of the time-image that the same transformation involves the
cinema of fiction and the cinema of reality and blurs their
differences; in the same movement, descriptions become pure,
purely optical and sound, narrations falsifying and stories,
simulations. The whole cinema becomes a free, indirect dis­
course, operating in reality. The forger and his power, the
film-maker and his character, or the reverse, since they only exist
through this community which allows them to say ‘we, creators of
truth’. This is a third time-image, distinct from those we saw in the
previous chapter. The two earlier ones essentially concerned the
order of time, that is, the coexistence of relations or the simultaneity
of the elements internal to time. The third concerns the series of
time, which brings together the before and the after in a
becoming, instead of separating them; its paradox is to introduce
an enduring interval in the moment itself.39 The three timeimages all break with indirect representation, but also shatter the
empirical continuation of time, the chronological succession, the
separation of the before and the after. They are thus connected
with each other and interpenetrate (Welles, Resnais, Godard,
Robbe-Grillet), but allow the distinction of their signs to subsist in
a particular work.

7 Thought and cinema

                                  1
Those who first made and thought about cinema began from a
simple idea: cinema as industrial art achieves self-movement,
automatic movement, it makes movement the immediate given
of the image. This kind of movement no longer depends on a
moving body o r an object which realizes it, nor on a spirit which
reconstitutes it. It is the image which itself moves in itself. In this
sense, therefore, it is neither figurative nor abstract. It could be
said that this was already the case with all artistic images; and
Eisenstein constantly analyses the paintings of Da Vinci and El
Greco as if they were cinematographic images (as Elie Faure
does with Tintoretto). But pictorial images are nevertheless
immobile in themselves so that it is the mind which has to ‘make’
movement. And choreographic or dramatic images remain
attached to a moving body. It is only when movement becomes
automatic that the artistic essence of the image is realized:
producing a shock to thought, communicating vibrations to the cortex,
touching the nervous and cerebral system directly. Because the cine­
matographic image itself ‘makes’ movement, because it makes
what the other arts are restricted to demanding (or to saying), it
brings together what is essential in the other arts; it inherits it, it
is as it were the directions for use of the other images, it converts
into potential what was only possibility. Automatic movement gives
rise to a spiritual automaton in us, which reacts in turn on
movement.1The spiritual automaton no longer designates —as it
does in classical philosophy —the logical or abstract possibility of
formally deducing thoughts from each other, but the circuit into
which they enter with the movement-image, the shared power of
what forces thinking and what thinks under the shock; a
nooshock.2* Heidegger said: ‘Man can think in the sense that he
possesses the possibility to do so. This possibility alone, however,
is no guarantee to us that we are capable of thinking.’3 It is this
capacity, this power, and not the simple logical possibility, that
cinema claims to give us in communicating the shock. It is as if
cinema were telling us: with me, with the movement-image, you
can’t escape the shock which arouses the thinker in you. A

Thought and cinema                                              157
subjective and collective automaton for an automatic movement:
the art of the ‘masses’.
   Everyone knows that, if an art necessarily imposed the shock or
vibration, the world would have changed long ago, and men
would have been thinking for a long time. So this pretension of
the cinema, at least among the greatest pioneers, raises a smile
today. They believed that cinema was capable of imposing the
shock, and imposing it on the masses, the people (Vertov,
Eisenstein, Gance, Elie Faure . . . ). However, they foresaw that
cinema would encounter and was already encountering all the
ambiguides of the other arts; that it would be overlaid with
experimental abstractions, ‘formalist antics’ and commercial
configurations of sex and blood. The shock would be confused, in
bad cinema, with the figurative violence of the represented
instead of achieving that other violence of a movement-image
developing its vibrations in a moving sequence which embeds
itself within us. Worse still, the spiritual automaton was in danger
of becoming the dummy of every kind of propaganda: the art of
the masses was already showing a disquieting face.4 Thus the
power or capacity of cinema was in turn revealed to be only a pure
and simple logical possibility. At least the possible took on a new
form here, even if the people were not yet a match for it, and even
if thought was still to come. Something was in play, in a sublime
conception of cinema. In fact, what constitutes the sublime is that
the imagination suffers a shock which pushes it to the limit and
forces thought to think the whole as intellectual totality which
goes beyond the imagination. The sublime, as we have seen, may
be mathematical, as in Gance, or dynamic, as in Murnau and
Lang, or dialectical, as in Eisenstein. We will take the example of
Eisenstein because the dialectical method allows him to decom­
pose the nooshock into particularly well-determined moments
(but the whole of the analysis is valid for classical cinema, the
cinema of the movement-image, in general).
   According to Eisenstein, the first moment goes from the image
to thought, from the percept to the concept. The movementimage (cell) is essentially multiple and divisible in accordance with
the objects between which it is established, which are its integral
parts. There is shock of images between themselves according to
their dominant characteristic, or shock in the image itself
depending on its components, and, again, shock of images
depending on all their components; the shock is the very form of
communication of movement in images. And Eisenstein criticizes

158                                                         Cinema 2
Pudovkin for having retained only the simplest case of shock.
Opposition defines the general formula, or the violence of the
image. We saw earlier Eisenstein’s concrete analyses of Battleship
Potemkin and The General Line, and the abstract schema which is
revealed: the shock has an effect on the spirit, it forces it to think,
and to think the Whole. The Whole can only be thought, because
it is the indirect representation of time which follows from
movement. It does not follow like a logical effect, analytically, but
synthetically as the dynamic effect of images ‘on the whole
cortex’. Thus it relies on montage, although it follows from the
image: it is not a sum, but a ‘product’, a unity of a higher order.
The whole is the organic totality which presents itself by opposing
and overcoming its own parts, and which is constructed like the
great Spiral in accordance with the laws of dialectic. The whole is
the concept. This is why cinema is dubbed ‘intellectual cinema’,
and montage ‘thought-montage’. Montage is in thought ‘the
intellectual process’ itself, or that which, under the shock, thinks
the shock. W hether it is visual or of sound, the image already has
harmonics which accompany the perceived dominant image, and
enter in their own ways into suprasensory relations (for example,
the saturation of heat in the procession in The General Line): this is
the shock wave or the nervous vibration, which means that we can
no longer say ‘I see, I hear’, but I FEEL, ‘totally physiological
sensation’. And it is the set of harmonics acting on the cortex
which gives rise to thought, the cinematographic I THINK: the
whole as subject. If Eisenstein is a dialectician, it is because he
conceives of the violence of the shock in the form of opposition
and the thought of the whole in the form of opposidon overcome,
or of the transformation of opposites: ‘From the shock of two
 factors a concept is born’.1This is the cinema of the punch —‘Soviet
cinema must break heads.’ But in this way he dialecticizes the
 most general given of the movement-image; he thinks that any
 other conception weakens the shock and leaves thought optional.
 The cinematographic image must have a shock effect on thought,
 and force thought to think itself as much as thinking the whole.
 This is the very definition of the sublime.
   But there is a second moment which goes from the concept to
 the affect, or which returns from thought to the image. It is a
 matter of giving ‘emotional fullness’ or ‘passion’ back to the
 intellectual process. Not only is the second moment inseparable
 from the first, but we cannot say which is first. Which is first,
 montage or movement-image? The whole is produced by the

Thought and cinema                                              159
parts but also the opposite: there is a dialectical circle or spiral,
‘monism’ (which Eisenstein contrasts with Griffith-style dualism).
The whole as dynamic effect is also the presupposition of its
cause, the spiral. This is why Eisenstein continually reminds us
that ‘intellectual cinema’ has as correlate ‘sensory thought’ or
‘emotional intelligence’, and is worthless without it. The organic
has as correlate the pathetic. The highest form of consciousness
in the work of art has as correlate the deepest form of the
subconscious, following a ‘double process’ or two coexisting
moments. In this second moment, we no longer go from the
movement-image to the clear thinking of the whole that it
expresses; we go from a thinking of the whole which is presup­
posed and obscure to the agitated, mixed-up images which
express it. The whole is no longer the logos which unifies the
parts, but the drunkenness, the pathos which bathes them and
spreads out in them. From this point of view images constitute a
malleable mass, a descriptive material loaded with visual and
sound features of expression, synchronized or not, zig-zags of
forms, elements of action, gestures and profiles, syntactic sequen­
ces. This is a primitive language or thought, or rather an internal
monologue, a drunken monologue, working through figures,
metonymies, synecdoches, metaphors, inversions, attractions . . .
From the outset, Eisenstein thought that the internal monologue
found its extension and importance in cinema rather than
literature, but he still restricted it to the ‘course of thought of a
man’. It is in the 1935 speech that he discovers it to be appropriate
for the spiritual automaton, that is, to the whole film. Internal
monologue goes beyond dream, which is much too individual,
and constitutes the segments or links of a truly collective thought.
He develops a pathos-filled power of imagination which reaches
the limits of the universe, an ‘orgy of sensory representations’, a
visual music which is like mass, fountains of cream, fountains of
luminous water, spurting fires, zig-zags forming numbers, as in
the famous sequence in The General Line. Earlier, we went from
the shock-image to the formal and conscious concept, but now
 from the unconscious concept to the material-image, the figureimage which embodies it and produces shock in turn. The figure
gives the image an affective charge which will intensify the
sensory shock. The two moments are mixed up, interlaced, as in
the ascent in The General Line where zig-zags of numbers repeat
the conscious concept.fi
   Here again it will be noted that Eisenstein dialecticizes a very

160                                                       Cinema 2
general aspect of the movement-image and montage. The view
that the cinematographic image proceeds through figures, and
reconstitutes a kind of primitive thought, is to be found in many
authors, notably Epstein. Even when the European cinema
restricts.itself to dream, fantasy, or day-dreaming, its ambition is
to bring the unconscious mechanisms of thought to consciousness.' It
is true that cinema’s capacity for metaphor has been called into
question. Jakobson noted that cinema is typically metonymic,
because it essentially proceeds by juxtaposition and contiguity: it
does not have metaphor’s specific power of giving a ‘subject’ the
verb or action of another subject; it has to juxtapose the two
subjects, and so make the metaphor subject to a metonymy."
Cinema cannot say with the poet: ‘hands flutter’; it must first show
hands being moved about quickly and then leaves fluttering. But
this restriction is only partially true. It is true if we compare the
cinematographic image to an utterance. It is false if we take the
cinematographic image for what it is; movement-image which, as
well as dividing movement by connecting it to the objects between
which it is established (metonymy which separates images), can
dissolve movement by connecting it with the whole that it
expresses (metaphor which connects images). It thus appears to
us correct to say that Griffith’s montage is metonymic but
Eisenstein’s metaphoric.9 If we talk about fusion, we are not just
thinking of superimposition as a technique, but of an affective
fusion which is explained, in Eisenstein’s terms, because two
distinct images can have the same harmonics and so constitute
metaphor. Metaphor is defined precisely by the harmonics of the
image. We find the example of a metaphor which is authentic to
the cinema in Eisenstein’s Strike: the boss’s big spy is first shown
the wrong way round, head downwards, his massive legs rising
like two tubes which end in a puddle at the top of the screen; then
we see the two factory chimneys which seem embedded in a cloud.
This is a metaphor with double inversion, since the spy is shown
first, and shown upside-down. The puddle and the cloud, the legs
and the chimneys have the same harmonics: it is a metaphor
through montage. But cinema also achieves metaphors in the
image and without montage. In this respect, it is in an American
film that we find the finest metaphor in the history of cinema:
Keaton’s The Navigator, where the hero in the life-jacket,
strangled, dying, drowning in his life-jacket, is going to be
awkwardly saved by the girl. She takes him between her legs to
make sure of a grip and finally manages to open the jacket by

Thought and cinema                                                 161
cutting it, whereupon a flood of water escapes from it. Never has
an image rendered so well the violent metaphor of giving birth,
by caesarian section and explosion of the amniotic sac.
   Eisenstein had a similar idea when he distinguished the
different cases of affective composition: the one where nature
reflects the hero’s state, two images having the same harmonics
(for example, a sad nature for a sad hero); the other, more
difficult, where a single image captures the harmonics of a
different image which is not shown (for example, adultery as
‘crime’, the lovers having the gestures of a m urder victim and a
mad assassin)."1 Metaphor is sometimes extrinsic, sometimes
intrinsic. But, in both cases, the composition does not simply
express the way in which the character experiences himself, but
also expresses the way in whiclj the author and the viewer judge
him, it integrates thought into the image: what Eisenstein called
‘the new sphere of filmic rhetoric, the possibility of bearing an
abstract social judgem ent’. A circuit which includes simultane­
ously the author, the film and the viewer is elaborated. The
complete circuit thus includes the sensory shock which raises us
from the- images to conscious thought, then the thinking in
figures which takes us back to the images and gives us an affective
shock again. Making the two coexist, joining the highest degree of
consciousness to the deepest level of the unconscious: this is the
dialectical automaton. The whole is constantly open (the spiral),
but so that it can internalize the sequence of images, as well as
becoming externalized in this sequence. The whole forms a
knowledge, in the Hegelian fashion, which brings together the
image and the concept as two movements each of which goes
towards the other.
   There is still a third moment, equally present in the two
previous ones. Not from image to concept, or from concept to
image, but the identity of concept and image. The concept is in
itself in the image, and the image is for itself in the concept. This is
 no longer organic and pathetic but dramatic, pragmatic, praxis,
or action-thought. This action-thought indicates the relation
between man and the world, between man and nature, the sensory-
 motor unity, but by raising it to a supreme power (‘monism’).
Cinema seems to have a real vocation in this respect. As Bazin
said, the cinematographic image contrasts with the theatrical
image in that it goes from the outside to the inside, from the
setting to the character, from nature to man (even if it begins
 from human action, it does so as if from an outside, and even if it

162                                                            Cinema 2
starts from a human face, it does so as if from a nature or a
landscape)." It is thus all the more suitable for showing the
 reaction of man on nature, or the externalization of man. In the
sublime there is a sensory-motor unity of nature and man, which
 means that nature must be named the non-indifferent. This is
already what effective or metaphoric composition expresses, for
example, in Battleship Potemkin where three elements, water, earth
and air, harmonically reveal an external nature in mourning
around the human victim, whilst man’s reaction will externalize
itself in the development of the fourth element, the fire, which
brings a new quality to nature in revolutionary conflagration.12
 But it is also man who passes to a new quality, in becoming the
collective subject of his own reaction, whilst nature becomes the
objective human relation. Action-thought simultaneously posits
the unity of nature and man, of the individual and the mass:
cinema as art of the masses. It is for this reason that Eisenstein
justifies the primacy of montage: cinema does not have the
 individual as its subject, nor a plot or history as its object; its object
 is nature, and its subject the masses, the individuation of mass and
 not that of a person. What theatre and especially opera had
 unsuccessfully attempted, cinema achieves (Battleship Potemkin,
October): to reach the Dividual, that is, to individuate a mass as
such, instead of leaving it in a qualitative homogeneity or
 reducing it to a quantitive divisibility.13
    It is all the more interesting to note how Eisenstein replies to
 the criticisms addressed to him by the Stalinists. He is criticized
 for not capturing the truly dramatic element of action-thought,
 for presenting the sensory-motor connection in an external and
very general way: without showing how it is formed in the
character. The criticism is simultaneously ideological, technical
and political: Eisenstein goes no further than an idealist concep­
 tion of nature, which replaces ‘history’, a dominating conception
of montage, which crushes the image or shot, an abstract
conception of the masses, which obscures the conscious personal
 hero. Eisenstein understands extremely well what is at stake here
and surrenders to a self-criticism in which prudence and irony
 play an equal part. This is the great speech of 1935. Yes, he
 bungled the role of the hero, that is of the party and its leaders,
because he remained too external to events, the simple observer
or fellow-traveller. But it was the first period of Soviet cinema,
before ‘the Bolshevization of the masses’ which gives rise to
 personal and conscious heroes. Nor was everything bad in this

Thought and cinema                                                163
first period, which makes the following one possible. And the
following one would have to keep montage, even if it integrated it
better into the image and even into the playing of the actors.
Eisenstein was going to concern himself with properly dramatic
heroes, Ivan the Terrible, Alexander Nevsky, while preserving the
earlier achievements, the non-indifference of nature and the
individuation of the masses. At the most he could note that the
second period had, to date, produced only mediocre works, and
that it was in danger, if they were not careful, of losing the
specificity of the Soviet cinema. They must avoid the Soviet
cinema’s coming close to the American, which had specialized in
personal heroes and dramatic actions . . .
   It is indeed true that the three relationships between cinema
and thought are encountered together everywhere in the cinema
of the movement-image: the relationship with a whole which can only
be thought in a higher awareness, the relationship with a thought which
can only be shaped in the subconscious unfolding of images, the
sensory-motor relationship between world and man, nature and thought.
Critical thought, hypnotic thought, action-thought. What Eisen­
stein criticizes in others, and primarily in Griffith, is having badly
understood the whole, because they were content with a diversity
of images without reaching the constituent oppositions, having
composed figures badly, because they do not achieve true
metaphors or harmonics; to have reduced aclion to a melodrama,
because they were content to have a personal hero caught in a
psychological rather than a social situation.14In short, they lacked
dialectical practice and theory. It is still true that American
cinema, in its own way, displayed the three fundamental relation­
ships. The action-image could go from the situation to the action,
or conversely, from the action to the situation; it was inseparable
from acts of comprehension through which the hero evaluated
what was given in the problem or situation, or from acts of
inference by which he guessed what was not given (thus, as we
have seen, the lightning reasoning-images of Lubitsch). And
these acts of thought in the image extended in a double direction,
relation of the images with a thought whole and with figures of
thought. Let us return to an extreme example: if Hitchcock’s
cinema appeared to us the very culmination of the movementimage, it is because it goes beyond the action-image towards the
‘mental relations’ which frame it and constitute its linkage, but at
the same time returns to the image in accordance with ‘natural
relations’ which make up a framework. From the image to the

164                                                       Cinema 2
relation, and from the relation to the image: all the functions of
thought are included in this circuit. In accordance with the
English genius, this is definitely not a dialectic, it is a logic of
relations (which particularly explains the fact that ‘suspense’
replaces ‘shock’).13 There are, therefore, many ways in which
cinema can carry its relationships with thought into effect. But
these three relationships seem to be well defined at the level of the
movement-image.

                                 2
How strangely the great declarations, of Eisenstein, of Gance,
ring today; we put them to one side like declarations worthy of a
museum, all the hopes put into cinema, art of the masses and new
thought. We can always say that cinema has drowned in the nul­
lity of its productions. What becomes of Hitchcock’s suspense,
Eisenstein’s shock and Gance’s sublimity when they are taken up
by mediocre authors? When the violence is no longer that of the
image and its vibrations but that of the represented, we move into
a blood-red arbitrariness. When grandeur is no longer that of the
composition, but a pure and simple inflation of the represented,
there is no cerebral stimulation or birth of thought. It is rather a
generalized shortcoming in author and viewers. Nevertheless a
current mediocrity has never prevented great painting; but it is
not the same in the conditions of an industrial art, where the pro­
portion of disgraceful works calls the most basic goals and capa­
cities directly into question. Cinema is dying, then, from its
quantitative mediocrity. But there is a still more important
reason: the mass-art, the treatment of masses, which should not
have been separable from an accession of the masses to the status
of true subject, has degenerated into state propaganda and ma­
nipulation, into a kind of fascism which brought together Hitler
and Hollywood, Hollywood and Hitler. The spiritual automaton
became fascist man. As Serge Daney says, what has brought the
whole cinema of the movement-image into question are ‘the great
political mises-en-scene, state propaganda turned tableaux vivants,
the first handlings of masses of humans’, and their backdrop, the
camps.IB This was the death-knell for the ambitions of ‘the old
cinema’: not, or not only, the mediocrity and vulgarity of current
production but rather Leni Riefenstahl, who was not mediocre.

Thought and cinema                                              165
And the situation is still worse if we accept Virilio’s thesis: there
has been no diversion or alienation in an art of the masses initially
founded by the movement-image; on the contrary the movement-image was from the beginning linked to the organization of
war, state propaganda, ordinary fascism, historically and essen­
tially.1' These two joint reasons, mediocrity of products and
fascism of production, can explain a great many things. For a
brief moment, Artaud ‘believes’ in cinema, and makes a number
of declarations which seen to coincide with those of Eisenstein or
Gance; new art, new thought. But he very quickly renounces it.
‘The imbecile world of images caught as if by glue in millions of
retinas will never perfect the image that has been made of it. The
poetry which can emerge from it all is only a possible poetry, the
poetry of what might be, and it is not from cinema that we should
expect. . .’IH
   Perhaps there is a third reason, oddly capable of restoring hope
in a possibility of thinking in cinema through cinema. We must
study the case of Artaud more closely, because it may well be of
crucial importance. For, during the brief period that he believed,
^Aftaud seems at first sight to take up the great themes of the
movement-image in its relations with thought. He says specifically
that cinema must avoid _two pitfalls, abstract experimental
cinema, which was developing at the time, and commercial
figurative_cinema. which Hollywood was imposing. He says that
cinema is a matter of neuro-physiologicaL vibrations, and that the
image must produce a shock, a nerve-wave which gives rise to
thought, ‘for thoughris~a matron who has not always existed’.
Thought has no other reason to function than its own birth,
always the repetition of its own birth, secret and profound. He
says that the image thus has as object the functioning of thought,
and that the functioning of thought is also the real subject which
brings us back to the images. He adds that the dream as it appears
in the European rinema inspired by surrealism, is an interesting
approximation, but inadequate in relation to this floak'tBe'dream
is too easy a solution to theJproblem- of-thought. Artaud believes
 more Tn an appropriateness between cinema and automatic
writing, as long as we understand that autçınaticjvriting is not at
all an absence of composition, but a higher control which brings
together critical and conscious thought and the unconscious in
thought: the spiritual automaton (which is very different from
 the dreanCwhich brings together a censure or repression with an
 unconscious made up of impulses). He adds that his point of view

166                                                         Cinema 2
 is much ahead of its time and is in danger of being misunder­
 stood, even by the surrealists, to which his relations with
 Germaine Dulac testify, as she goes back and forth from an
 abstract cinema to a dream-cinema.19
    At first sight, there is nothing to bring these declarations of
 Artaud into conflict with those of Eisenstein: from the image to
 thought there is shock or vibration, which must give rise to
 thought in thought; from thought to the image, there is the figure
 which must be realized in a kinciof internal-monnlogue (rather
 than in a dream), capable of giving us the shock again. And yet
 there is something quite different in Artaud: a recognition of
 poj«erle.ssnessJ.which does not yet have a bearing on cinema, but
 on the contrary defines the real object-subject of cinema. What
 cinema advances is not thespojjrerjof4hpught but its ‘irnpoji^er’,2"*
 and thought has never had any other problem. It is precisely this
 which is much more important than the dream: this difficulty of
 being, this poweriessness at ^he h^art of_thmight. What the
 enemies of cinema criticized it for (like Georges Duhamel, ‘I can
 no longer think what I want, the moving images-are-substituted
 for my own thoughts’), is just what Artaud makes into the dark
jjlory and profundity of cinemaHn fact, the problem for him is
  not of a simple inhibition that the cinema would bring to us from
 the outside, but of this central inhibition, of this internal collapse
 and fossilization, of this ‘theft of thoughts’ of which thought is a
 constant agent and victim. \Artaud would stop believing in the
 cinema when he considered that dnfma_-was--sidetracking and
 could produce only the ahstrartor the figurative or_thf-dream-
  But he believes in the cinema as long as he considers that cinema is
  essentially suited to reveal this powerlessness to think at the heart
  of thought. If we consider Artaud’s actual scripts, the vampire in
 32, the madman in La révolte du boucher, and especially the suicide
.case in Dix-huit secondes, the hero ‘has become incapable of
  achieving his thoughts’, ‘he is reduced to only seeing a parade of
  images within him, an excess of contradictory images’, his ‘spirit
'has been stolen’. The spiritual nr mental antnmatnn is no longer
  defined by the logical possibility of a thought which would
  formally deduce his-ideas_from_each_other.21 But no more
  through the physicaLpg}4&erj^aJjTOUght that would be placed in a
  circuit with the automatic image. The spiritual automaton has
  become the Mummy, this dismantled, paralysed, petrified, frozen
  instance which testifies to ‘the impossibility of thinking that is
  thought’.22 It could be said that ve xpressionisrnKad already made

Thought and cinema                                                        167
 us familiar with all this, theft of thoughts, splitting in two of
 personality, hypnotic petrification, hallucination, raging schizo­
 phrenia. But, here again, we are in danger of misconstruing
'Artaud’s originality: it is no longer thought) which confronts
 repression, the unconscious, dream, sexuality or death, as in
^xpressiorjjsm (and also in surrealism), it is all these determin­
 ations which confront thought as higher ‘problem’, or which
^nter into relation with the undeterminable, the unreferable.23
 The navel, or the Mummy, is no longer the irreducible core of the
 dream which thought comes up against, on the contrary, it is the
 core of thought, ‘the reverse side of thoughts’, which itself is what
 dreams come up against and rebound, break. Whilst expresr
 sionism makes wakefulness pass through aTriocturnal treatment,
 Artaud makes dream pass through ai dmrnaly treatment. Artaud’s
 vigilambulist, in Dix-huit secondes or La coquille et le clergyman is the
 opposite of the expressionist somnambulist.
    In spite of a superficial similarity of words, there is, therefore,
 an absolute opposition between Artaud’s project and a concep­
tion such as Eisenstein’s. It is indeed a matter, as Artaud puts it,
 ‘of bringing cinema together with the innermost reality of the
^brain’, but this innermost reality is not the Whole, but on the
 contrary a fissure, a cradtj'1As long as he believes in cinema, he
 credits it, not with tfie power of making us think the whole, but on
 the-contrary with a ‘dissociative force’ which would introduce a
(‘figure of nothingness’, a ‘holeJo_appearances\ As long as he
 believes in cinema, he credits it, not with the power of returning
 to images, and linking them according to the demands of an
 internal monologue and the rhythm of metaphors, but of
 ‘un-linking’ them , according to_muldple—voices.-internal-dia-
 logues. always a voice in anothen^oice. In short, it is the totality of
 cinema-thought relations that Artaud overturns: on the one hand
 there is ryo longer a ^ w l i p I f P ^ h i n k a b l e through montage, on the
 other hand there is no longer an internal monologue utterable
 through image. It might be said that Artaud turns round
 Eisenstein’s argument: if it is true that thought depends on a;
 shock which gives birth to it (the nerve, the brain matter), it can'
 only think one thing, the fact that we are not yet thinking, the
 powerlessness to think the whole and to think oneself, thought
 which is always fossilized, dislocated, collapsed. A_being_of
 thought which is always to come is what Heidegger discovered in
 a universal form , but it is what Artaud lived as the most singular
 problem, his own problem.25 Between Heidegger and Artaud,

168                                                       Cinema 2
^Ma^jœ^Blancfio^was able to give the fundamental question of
 what m ates us think, what forces us to think, back to Artaud:
 what forces us to think is ‘the inyo'wer\impnuvoif\ of thought’. the
 figure of nothingness, the inexistence of.a_wh.ole which could be
 thought. What Blapchot diagnoses everywhere in literature is
 particularly clear in cinema: on the one hand the presence of an
unthinkable-in thought, which would be both its source and
 barrier; on the other hand the presence to infinity^Qfjmother
 thinker in the thinker, who shatters every monologue of a
 thinking self.
    But the question is: in what respect does all this essentially
 concern the cinema? It is perhaps the question for literature, or
 philosophy, or even psychiatry. But in what respect is it thé^
 question for the cinema; that is, a question that touches on its
 specificity, on its difference from other disciplines? The cinema
 does not in fact deal with this question in the same way, although
 it is encountered elsewhere with other means of expression. By
 what means does cinema approach this.question of thought, its
 f\indan^ntalj30werlessngss and the consequences ofthïsT'It is
 truethatbad cinema (and sometimes good) limits itself to a dream
 state induced in the viewer, or — as has been the subject of
 frequent analysis —to an imaginary participation. But the essence
 of cinema —which is notthe^majorifylaCfilms —has thought as its
 higher purpose, nothing but thojj^ht^apd itsJupctiQning. In this
 regard, the strength of I earvLouis^Schefer’s book is in having
 replied to the question: in wïïat respect and how is cinema
 concerned with a thought whose essential character is not yet to
 be? He says that the cinematographic image, as soon as it takes on
 its aberration of movement, carries out ajiisfiemioiLMjJhejy.orld or
 affects the visible with a disturbance, which, far from making
 thought visible, as Eisenstein wanted, are onthe.contrary-directed
lo w h atd o es not let itself be thought in thought, and equally to
 what does not let itself be seen in vision. This is perhaps not
 ‘crime’, as he believes, but simply the power of the false. He says
 that ihought. in cinema, is broughtTface to face with its own
 impossibility^and yet draws from this a highcnpower-aLbirth. He
 adds that the condition of cinema has only one equivalent, not
 imaginary_participation but the rain when you leave the audi­
 torium; not dream , but the blackness and insomnia. Schefer is
 close to Artaud. His conception of cinema now finds a complete
 match in the work of Garrel: the dancing grains which are not
 made_to.be seen, the luminous dust which is not a préfiguration of

Thought and cinema                                               169
bodies, the-flakes-o£snow-and-blankets of-soot.26 Provided that we
can show persuasively that such works, far from being boring or
abstract, represent the most entertaining, lively and disquieting
things that can be done in cinema. As well as the great scene with
the mill and the white flour piling up, at the end of Dreyer’s
Vampyr, Schefer proposes the example of the beginning of
Kurosawa’s CobwebJZastle ('Macbeth'!: the grey, the steam and the
mist constitute ‘a whole this side of the image’, which is not a
blurred veil put in front of things, but ‘a thought, without body
and without image’. This was also the case with Welles’s Macbeth,
where the indiscernibility of earth and water, sky and land, good
and evil constituted a ‘p rehistory of consciousness’ (Bazin) which
produced the thought of its own impossibility. Was this not
already the mists of Odessa, despite Eisenstein’s intentions?
According to Schefer, it is-the suspension of the world1, rather
than movement, which givesjtfie .visible,.to__thought, not as its
object,-but as an actJvhichjs-constaRtly-aFising-and-being-revealed
in thought: ‘not that it is here a matter of thought become visible^
the_yisjble is affected and irremediably infected by the initial
incoherence of thought, this inchoate quality’. This is the
description of the ordinary man in cinema: the.spintuaLautomaton,
‘mechanical man’, ‘experimental dummy’, Cartesian diver in us,
unknown body which we have only at the back of our heads whose
age is neither ours nor that of our childhood, but a little time in
the pure state.
   If this experience of thought essentially (but not exclusively)
concerns modern cinema, it is first as a result of the change which
affects the image: the image has ceased to be sensoryjjnotor. If
Artaud) is a forerunner, from a specifically cinematographic
perspective, it is because he points toj~‘feal~psych'icsituations
between which trapped thought looks for asubtle way out’, ‘purely
visual situations, whose drama would flow from a knock made for
the eyes, drawn out, if we may put it this way, in the very substance
of the gaze’.27 Now this sensory-motor break finds its condition at
a higher level and itself comes back to a break in the link between
man and the world.vTtiesensory-motor break makes man a_seer
who finds himself struclTSy_SQmething.intolerable in the world,
and confronted-hu-something-unthinkable-in-thought. Between
the two, thought undergoes a strange fossilization, which is as it
were its powerlessness to function, to be, its dispossession of itself
and the world. For it is not in the name of a better or truer world
that thniight raptnres-J.he-vntelferahleJn this world, but, on the

170                                                           Cinema 2
 contrary, it is because this world is intolerable that it can no longer
 think a world or think itself. Xhe intolerable is no longer a serious
 injusdce, but the permanent state of a daily banality. Man is~not
 himself a world other than the one in which he experiences the
■intolerable and feelsJlirns elf-trapped. Thp spiritual aiTrnmaiojpis
 in the psychic situation of the seer, who sees_betleE-and_Eurther
 than he ran react, that is,(thinly Which, then, is the subtle way out?
 To believe, not in a different world, but in a link between man and
 the world, in love or life, to believe in this as in thejmpossihle, the
 unthinkable, which none the less cannot but be^houghlj: ‘some­
 thing possible, otherwise I will suffocate’. It is this belief that
jnakes the>nnrhmighr the specific pnwejLofth-QUght, through the
 absurd) by virtue of the absurd. ^Artaud^ never understood
"powerlessness to think as a simple inferiority which would strike
 us in relation to thought. It is part of thought, so that we should
 make our way of thinking from it, without claiming to be
 restoring an all-pow erful thought. We should rather make use of
 this powerlessnp-ss.m believe in life, and to-discover-the-identity of
 thought anrLlife: ‘I think of life, all the systems that I shall be able
 to build will never match my cries of a man engaged in remaking
 his life . .. ’ Was there in Artaud an affinity with Dreyer? Was
 Dreyer an Artaud to whom reason would have been ‘restored’,
 once again by virtue of the absurd? Drouzy has noted Dreyer’s
 great psychic crisis, his schizophrenic journey.2" But, even more
 to the point, Véronique Tacquin has been able to show how the
jnum m yJ^e^pirnuaLai^Q i^ton) haunts his last films. This was
 already true of V_ampyr, where t h e mummy appeared as the
 diabolic.force of.thew.orld, the Vam pire itself, but also as the
 uncertain hero, who does not know-what-to-think-and-dreams his
 ownfossilization. In Ordet, the mummy has become thought itself,
 the young, dead, cataleptic woman: it is the madman of the family
 who restores her to life and love, precisely because he has ceased
 to be mad, that is, to believejiimself to be another world, and
 because he now knows what believing means . . . G.ezimd finally
 develops all the implications and the new relation between
 cinema and thought: the ‘gsychjc^situation which replaces all
 sensorv-motor situations: the perpetual break of the link with the
 world, the perpetual hole in appearances, embodied in false
 continuity; the grasping of the intolerable even in the everyday
 and insignificant (the long scene in tracking shot that Gertrud will
 not be able to bear, the schoolboys coming rhythmically along,
 like robots, to thank the poet for having taught them love and

Thought and cinema                                               171
freedom); the enconnter with the unthinkable which cannot even
be spoken, but sung, to the point of G ertrud’s passing-out; the
fossilization, the ‘mummifying’ of the heroine, who becomes
conscious of belief as thought of the unthinkable (‘Have I been
young? No but I have loved. Have I been beaudful? No but I have
loved. Have I been in life? No but I have loved.’). In all these
respects, Gertrud inaugurates a new cinema, whose sequel will be
Rossellini’s Europe_51. Rossellini expresses his position in relation
to this: the less human the world is, the more it is the artist’s duty
to believe and produce belief in a relation between man and the
world, because the world is made by men.29The heroine of Europe
51,a. mummy radiating tenderness.
   It is clear from the outset that'clnema1had a special relationship
with BejigfJ There is a Catholic quality to cinema (there are many
explicitly Catholic authors, even in America, and those who are
not have complex relationships with Catholicism). Is there not in
Catholicism a grand mise-en-scene, but also, in the cinema, a cult
which takes over the circuit of the cathedrals, as Elie Faure said?10
Cinema seems wholly within Nietzsche’s formula: ‘How we are
still pious.’ O r better, from the outset, Christianity and revolu­
tion, the Christian faith and revolutionary faith, were the two
poles which attracted the art of the masses. For the cinematogra­
phic image, in contrast to the theatre, showed us the link between
the man and the world. Hence it developed either in the direction
of a transformation of the world by man, or in the discovery of an
internal and higher world that man himself was . . . It cannot be
said today that these two poles of cinema have become weakened:
a certain Catholic quality has continued to inspire a great number
of authors, and revolutionary passion has passed into third world
cinema. What has changed is, however, the crucial point, and
there is as much difference between the Catholicism of Rossellini
or Bresson, and that of Ford, as between the revolutionary
qualities of Rocha or Giiney, and those of Eisenstein.
   The modern fact is that we no longer believe in this world. We
do not even believe in the events which happen to us, love, death,
as if they only half concerned us. It is not we who make cinema; it
is the world which looks to us like a bad film. Godard said, about
Bande apart: ‘These are people who are real and it’s the world that
is a breakaway group. It is the world that is making cinema for
itself. It is the world that is out of synch; they are right, they are
true, they represent life. They live a simple story; it is the world
around them which is living a bad script.''" The link between man

172                                                          Cinema 2
and the world is broken. Henceforth, this link must become an
object of belief: it is the impossible which can only be restored
within a faith. Belief is no longer addressed to a different or
transformed world. Man is in the world as if in a pure optical and
sound situation. The reaction of which man has been dis­
possessed can be replaced only by belief. Only belief in the world
can reconnect man to what he sees and hears. The cinema must
film, not the world, but belief Jn^this_worjd, our only link. The
nature of the cinematographic illusion has often been con­
sidered. Restoring our beliefJnjbe world —this is the power of
modern cinema (when it stops being bad). W hether we are
Christians or atheists, in our umversaLsdjizophrenia, we need
reasons to believe in this world. It is a whole transformation of belief.
It was already a great turning-point in philosophy, from Pascal to
Nietzsche: to replace the modeLof knowledge with belief.32 But
belief replaces knowledge only when it becomes belief in this
world, as it is. With Dreye^, then Rossellini, cinema takes the same
turn. In his last works, Rossellini loses interest in art, which he
reproaches for being infantile and sorrowful, for revelling in a
loss of world: he wants to replace it with a morality which would
restore a belief capable of perpetuating life. Rossellini un­
doubtedly still retains the ideal of knowledge, he will never
abandon this Socratic ideal, but he does need to establish it in a
belief in simple faith in man and the world. What made Joan ofArc
at the Stake a misunderstood work? The fact that Joan of Arc needs
to be in the sky to believe in the tatters of this world.33 It is from
the height of eternity that she can believe in this world. There is a
return of Christian belief in Rossellini, which is the highest
paradox. Belief, even in the case of holy characters, Mary, Joseph
and the Child, is quite prepared to go over to the side of the
atheist. In Godard, the ideal of knowledge, the Socratic ideal
which is still present in Rossellini, collapses: the ‘good’ discourse,
of the militant, the revolutionary, the feminist, the philosopher,
the film-maker, etc., gets no better treatment than the bad.34
Because the point is to discover and restore belief in the world,
before or beyond words. Is it enough to go to live in the sky, be it
the sky of art and painting, to find reasons to believe (Passion)} Or
shouldn’t we invent a ‘medium level’ between earth and sky (First
Name Carmen)?33 What is certain is that believing is no longer
believing in another world, or in a transformed world. It is only, it
is simply believing in the body. It is giving discourse to the body,
and, for this purpose, reaching the body before discourses,

Thought and cinema                                               173
 before words, before things are named: the ‘first name’, and even
 before the first name.’" Artaud said the same thing, believe in the
flesh: ‘I am a man who has lost his life and is searching by all means
 possible to make it regain its place.’ Godard foreshadows Hail
 Mary: what did Joseph and Mary say to each other, what did they
 say to each other before? Give words back to the body, to the flesh.
 In this respect, the influence between Godard and Garrel is
 exchanged or reversed. The only object of Garrel’s work has been
 making use of Mary, Joseph and the Child to believe in the body.
 When Garrel is compared to Artaud, or Rimbaud, there is
 something true that goes beyond a simple generality. O ur belief
 can have no object but ‘the flesh’, we need very special reasons to
 make us believe in the body (‘the Angels do not know, for all true
 knowledge is obscure. . . ’). We must believe in the body, but as in
 the germ of life, the seed which splits open the paving-stones,
 which has been preserved and lives on in the holy shroud or the
 mummy’s bandages, and which bears witness to life, in this world
 as it is. We need an ethic or a faith, which makes fools laugh; it is
 not a need to believe in something else, but a need to believe in
 this world, of which fools are a part.

                                  3
This is the first aspect of the new cinema: the break in the
sensory-motor link (action-image), and more profoundly in the
link between man and the world (great organic composition). The
second aspect is the abandoning of figures, metonymy as much as
metaphor, and at a deeper level the dislocation of the internal
monologue as descriptive material of the cinema. For example, in
regard to depth of field as introduced by Renoir and Welles, it has
been noted that this opened up a new direction for the cinema, no
longer metaphorically or even metonymically ‘figurative’, but
more demanding, more constraining, in some sense theorematic.
This is what Astruc says: depth of field has the physical effect of a
snow-plough; it makes characters enter and leave beneath the
camera, or at the back of the scene, and not now back and forth;
but it also has a mental effect of a theorem, it makes the unrolling
of the film a theorem rather than an association of images, it
makes thought immanent to the image.3' Astruc himself learnt
Welles’s lesson: the camera-pen gives up metaphor and
metonymy of montage, it writes with camera-movements,

174                                                         Cinema 2
high-angle shots, low-angle shots, back-shots, it carries out a
construction (The Crimson Curtain). There is now no room for
metaphor, there is not even any metonymy, because the necessity
which belongs to relations of thought in the image has replaced
the contiguity of relations of images (shot-reverse shot). The
author who became most committed to this theorematic direc­
 tion, even independently of depth of field, was^PasoljnK) un­
 doubtedly in all his work but in particular in Theorem and Salo,
 which present themselves as geometrical demonstrations in
 action (the Sadean inspiration in Salo comes from the fact that,
 already in Sade, unbearable corporeal figures are strictly subord­
 inated to the progress of a demonstration). Theorem and Salo
 aspire to have the paths of its own necessity follow on from
 thought, and to carry the image to the point where it becomes
 deductive and automatic, to substitute the formal linkages of
 thought for sensory-motor representative or figurative linkages.
 Is it possible that cinema achieves a truly mathematical rigour in
 this way, a rigour which no longer simply concerns the image (as
 in the old cinema which already subjected this to metrical and
 harmonic relations), but the thought of the image, the thought in
 the image? .Cinema of cruelty, of which Artaud said that it ‘does
 not tell a story but develops a sequence of spiritual states which
 are deduced from one another as thought is deduced from
 thought’.38
' Nevertheless, is this not the direction expressly rejected by
 Artaud, the conception that he challenged of the spiritual
 automaton as linking thoughts over which it would have formal
 power, in a model of knowledge? We should perhaps understand
 something else, in Pasolini’s work as well as in Artaud’s projects.
 In fact, there are two mathematical instances which constantly
 refer to each other, one enveloping the second, the second sliding
 into the first, but both very different in spite of their union: these
 are the theorem and thex problem. A problem lives in the
 theorem, and gives it life, even when removing its power. The
 problematic is distinguished from the theorematic (or constructi­
 vism from the axiomatic) in that the theorem develops internal
 relationships from principle to consequences, while the problem
 introduces an event from the outside —removal, addition, cutting
 —which constitutes its own conditions and determines the ‘case’ or
 cases: hence the ellipse, hyperbola, parabola, straight lines and
 the point are cases of projection of the circle on its secant planes,
 in relation to the apex of a cone. This outside of the problem is not

Thought and cinema                                                           175
reducible to the exteriority of the physical world any more than to
,the psychological interiority of a thinking ego. Astruc’s The
Crimson Curtain already introduces an unfathomable problem
rather than a theorem: what is the young girl’s case? What has
happened for the silent young girl to sacrifice herself, and not
even explain the love-sickness which is killing her? There is a
decision on which everything depends, deeper than all the
explanations that can be given for it. (Likewise the woman-traitor
in Godard: there is something in her decision which goes beyond
the simple desire -to —show_hersplf rh a f sh e is nnt in lnve) As
 Kierkegaard says, ‘the p ro fo u n d m nvem p.nfs_nf-thp.soiiLdisarnn
.psy.chologyVprecisely because-they-do-not-come_from.within. An
author’s strength is measured by the way he is able to impose this
 problematic, uncertain and yet non-arbitrary point: fgrace) or
ghance; It is in this sense that Pasolini’s deduction in Themfm must
be understood: a^ipblem aticj 3 jiiej^thai^ajheQrema.ti<^deduction. The envoy from outside is the instance on the basis of which
each member of the family experiences a decisive event or affect,
constituting one case of the problem, or the section of a
 hyper-spatial figure. Each case, each section will be considered as
 a mummy, the paralysed girl, the mother fixed in her erotic quest,
 the blindfolded son urinating on his painter’s canvas, the maid a
 victim of a mystical levitation, the animalized, naturalized father.
 Whatgiyesjthe^r^fejsjDeiiig^thejM^je^iQnsjjflaqjyiiside-which
 makes them, pass into ^ach other, like conical pro.jections_or
 metamorphoses. In Salo, on the contrary, there is no longer a
 problem because there is no outside: Pasolini presents, not even
 fascism in vivo, but fascism at bay, shut away in the little town,
 reduced to a pure interiority, coinciding with the conditions of
 closure in which Sade’s demonstrations took place. Salo is a pure,
 dead theorem, a theorem of death, as Pasolini wanted, while
 Theorem is a living problem. Hence Pasolini’s insistence, in
 Theorem, on invoking a problem towards which everything
 converges, as towards the always extrinsic point of thought, the
 uncertain point, the leitmotif of the film: ‘I am haunted by a
 question to which I cannot reply.’ Far from restoring knowledge,
 or the internal certainty that it lacks, to thought, the problematic
 deduction puts the unthought into thought, because it takes away
 all its interiority to excavate an outside in it, an irreducible
 reverse-side, which consumes its substance.™ Thought finds itself
 tak en o v e r hv rhp ex fftrin d t.v rif a ‘b e lie f1 outside any interiority of
 a mode of knowledge. Was this Pasolini’s way of still being

176                                                       Cinema 2
Catholic? Was it on the contrary hisvyay^ofbeing a radicaljathejst?
Has he not, like Ni_etzsch_e,_torn.belief-from-&veFy3aith.in order to
giveit^backtorigorousthought?
   If the problem is defined by a point of the outside we can better
understand the two values that the sequence shot can take on —
dejDtJi (Welles, Mizoguchi) or planitude (Dreyer and often
Kurosawa). Thus the apex of the cone: when it is occupied by the
eye, we find ourselves in front of flat projections or clear outlines
to which light is subordinate; but when it is occupied by thelight
source itself, we are in the presence of volumes jeliefs^chiaroscuros, concavities and convexities which subordinate the viewpoint
in a high-angle or low-angle shot. It is in this sense that Welles’s
expanses of shadow contrast with Dxeyei^s froxitaLp.^pecUves
(even if the Dreyer of Gertrud or the Rohmer of Perceval le Gallois
succeed in giving a curvature to flattened space). But what both
share is the position of an outside as instance which creates the
problem: the depth of theTimage has become the pure viewpoint
in Dreyer. In both casesfifoc^smgihasjumped-out-of the image.
What has been broken is the sensory-motor space which had its
own focuses and drew paths and obstacles between them.411 A
problem is not an obstacle. When Kurosawa takes up Dostoev§k.y!s-method^he-shows-us_characters-constantLv-seeking-the
givens of a ‘problem’. w.hich is even^deeper-than the situation in
which theyjind-themselves caught: in this way-he-goesieyond the
limits of knowledge, but also.thecondidons.ofaction. He reaches
a purely optical world, where the thing to be is a,seer, a perfect
‘Idiot’. Welles’s depth is of the same type, and is not situated in
relation to obstacles or concealed things, but in relation to a light
which makes us see beings and objects according to their opacity.
Just as clairvoyance replaces sight, ‘lux’ replaces ‘lumen’. In a text
which is relevant not only to Dreyer’s flat image but Welles’s
depth, Daney writes: ‘The question about this scenography is no
longer: what is there to see behind? But rather: can I hold my
gaze on what I am seeing anyway? And which is unfolding in a
single shot?’41 What I am seeing anyway is the formula of the
unendurable. It expresses a new relation between thought and
seeing, or between thought and the light source, which constantly
sets the thought outside itself, outside knowledge, outside action.
   It is characteristic of the problem that it is inseparable from a
choice. In mathematics, cutting a straight line into two equal parts
is a problem, because it may be cut into unequal parts; setting an
equilateral triangle in a circle is a problem, whilst setting a right

Thought and cinema                                              177
angle in a semicircle is a theorem, every angle in the semicircle
being a right angle. Now when the problem concerns existential
determinations and not mathematical matters, we see clearly that
choice is increasingly identified with living thought, and with an
unfathomable decision. Choice no longer concerns a particular
term, but the mode of existence of the one who chooses. This was
already the sense of Pascal’s wager: the problem was not that of
choosing between the existence or non-existence of God, but
between the mode of existence of the one who believes in God,
and the mode of existence of the one who does not. Again a
greater number of modes of existence were in play: there was the
person who saw the existence of God like a theorem (the devout
person), there was the one who did not know how to or was unable
to choose (the uncertain, the sceptic. . .). In short, choice covered
as great an area as thought, because it went from non-choice to
choice, and was itself formed between choosing and not choosing.
Kierkegaard drew all the consequences of this: choice being
posed between choice and non-choice (and all their variants)
sends us back to an absolute relation with the outside, beyond the
inward psychological consciousness, but equally beyond the
relative external world, and finds that it alone is capable of
restoring the world and the ego to us. We have seen how a cinema
of Christian inspiration was not content to apply these concep­
tions but revealed them as the highest theme of the film, in
Dreyer, Bresson, or Rohmer: the identity of thought with choice
as determination of the indeterminable. Gertrud herself passes
through all the states, between her father who said that we do not
make choices in life and her boyfriend who is writing a book about
choice. The formidable man of good, or the devout person (he for
whom there is no question of choosing), the uncertain or
indifferent (he who does not know how to, or is unable to choose),
the terrible man of evil (he who chooses a first dme, but can then
no longer choose, can no longer repeat his own choice), finally the
man of choice or belief (he who chooses choice or reiterates it):
this is a cinema of modes of existence, of confrontation of these
modes, and of their relation to an outside on which both the world
and the ego depend. This point of the outside, is it grace, or
chance? For his part, Rohmer takes up the Kierkegaardian stages
‘on the path of life’: the aesthedc stage in La Collectionneuse, the
ethical stage in Beau marriage, for example, and the religious stage
in My Night at Maud’s, or especially in Perceval le Gallois.*2 Dreyer
had himself run through the different stages of the devout

178                                                       Cinema 2
person’s over-certainty, the mystic’s mad certainty and the
aesthete’s uncertainty, as far as the simple belief of the one who
chooses to choose (and restores the world and life). Bresson
rediscovered Pascal’s emphases, to show the man of good, the
man of evil, the uncertain, but also the man of grace or awareness
of choice (the relation with outside, ‘the wind blows where it will’).
And in all three cases, it is not simply a question of a film-content:
it is cinema-form, according to these authors, which is capable of
revealing to us this higher determination of thought, choice, this
point deeper than any link with the world. Thus Dreyer only
secures the reign of the flat image cutoff from the world; Bresson
the reign of the disconnected and fragmented image, and
Rohmer that of a crystalline or miniaturized image, in order to
reach the fourth or fifth dimension, the Spirit, he who blows
where he will. In Dreyer, in Bresson and in Rohmer, in three
different ways, this is a cinema of the spirit which does not fail to
be more concrete, more fascinating and more amusing than any
other (cf. Dreyer’s comic aspect).
    It is cinema’s automatic character which gives it this capacity —
in contrast to the theatre. The automatic image demands a new
conception of the role or of the actor but also of thought itself.
Only he who is chosen chooses well or effectively: this could be
one of Rohmer’s proverbs, but equally a subtitle of Bresson’s or
an epigraph of Dreyer’s. What constitutes the whole is the
relation between automatism, the unthought and thought.
Dreyer’s mummy was cut off from an over-rigid, over-burdensome, or over-superficial external world: she was none the less
permeated by feelings, by an over-fullness of feeling, which she
neither could nor should outwardly express, but which would be
revealed in consequence of the deeper outside/3 In Rohmer, the
mummy gives way to a marionette, at thé same time as feelings
give way to an obsessive ‘idea’, which will inspire it from the
outside: even if it means abandoning it to return it to the void.
With Bresson, a third state appears, where the automaton is pure,
as bereft of ideas as of feelings, reduced to the automatism of
segmented daily gestures, but endowed with autonomy: this is
what Bresson calls the ‘model’ peculiar to cinema, the authentic
Vigilambulist, in contrast to the theatre actor. And it is precisely
the automaton, petrified in this way, that thought seizes from the
outside, as the unthinkable in thought.44 This question is very
different from that of distancing; it is the question of properly
cinematographic automatism, and its consequences. It is the

Thought and cinema                                                   179
material automatism of images which produces from the outside
a thought which it imposes, as the unthinkable in our intellectual
automatism.
    The automaton is cut off from the outside world, but there is a
more profound outside which will animate it. The first conse­
quence is a new status of the Whole in modern cinema. Neverthe­
less, there does not seem to be a great difference between what we
are saying now, the whole is the outside, and what we were saying
about classical cinema, the whole was the open. But the open merged
with the indirect representation of time: everywhere where there
was movement, there was a changing whole open somewhere, in
time. This was why the cinematographic image essentially had an
out-of-field which referred on the one hand to an external world
which was actualizable in other images, on the other hand to a
changing whole which was expressed in the set of associated
images. Even false continuity could be introduced, and prefigure
the modern cinema; but it seemed to constitute a mere anomaly
of movement or an association-disorder, which showed the
indirect action of the whole on the parts of the set. We have
examined these aspects. The whole was thus being continually
made, in cinema, by internalizing the images and externalizing
itself in the images, following a double attraction. This was the
process of an always open totalization, which defined montage or
the power of thought. When we say ‘the whole is the outside’, the
point is quite different. In the first place, the question is no longer
that of the association or attraction of images. What counts is on
the contrary the interstice between images, between two images: a
spacing which means that each image is plucked from the void
and falls back into it.4’ Godard’s strength is not just in using this
mode of construction in all his work (constructivism) but in
making it a method which cinema must ponder at the same time
as it uses it. Id et ailleurs marks a first peak in this reflection, which
is afterwards transferred to television in Six fois deux. It can, in
fact, always be objected that there is only an interstice between
associated images. From this point of view, images like those
which bring together Golda Meir and Hitler in Id et ailleurs would
be intolerable. But this is perhaps proof that we are not yet ready
for a true ‘reading’ of the visual image. For, in Godard’s method,
it is not a question of association. Given one image, another image
has to be chosen which will induce an interstice between the two.
This is not an operation of association, but of differentiation, as
mathemadcians say, or of disappearance, as physicists say: given

180                                                       Cinema 2
one potential, another one has to be chosen, not any whatever,
but in such a way that a difference of potential is established
between the two, which will be productive of a third or of
something new. Ici etailleurs chooses the French couple who enter
into disparity with the group of fedayeen. In other words, the
interstice is primary in relation to association, or irreducible
difference allows resemblances to be graded. The fissure has
become primary, and as such grows larger. It is not a matter of
following a chain of images, even across voids, but of getting out
of the chain or the association. Film ceases to be ‘images in a chain
. . . an uninterrupted chain of images each one the slave of the
next’, and whose slave we are (Ici et ailleurs). It is the method of
BETWEEN, ‘between two images’, which does away with all
cinema of the One. It is the method of AND, ‘this and then that’,
which does away with all the cinema of Being = is. Between two
actions, between two affections, between two perceptions, be­
tween two visual images, between two sound images, between the
sound and the visual: make the indiscernible, that is the frontier,
visible (Six fois deux). The whole undergoes a mutation, because it
has ceased to be the One-Being, in order to become the
constitutive ‘and’ of things, the constitutive between-two of
images. The whole thus merges with that Blanchot calls the force
o f‘dispersal of the Outside’, or ‘the vertigo of spacing’: that void
which is no longer a motor-part of the image, and which the
image would cross in order to continue, but is the radical calling
into question of the image (just as there is a silence which is no
longer the motor-part or the breathing-space of discourse but its
radical calling into question)/15False continuity, then, takes on a
new meaning, at the same time as it becomes the law.
    Just as the image is itself cut off from the outside world, the
out-of-field in turn undergoes a transformation. When cinema
became talkie, the out-of-field seems to have initially found a
confirmation of its two aspects: first, noises and voices could have
a source external to the visual image; secondly, a voice or a piece
of music could show the changing whole, behind or beyond the
visual image. Hence the notion of ‘voice-off as sound expression
of the out-of-field. But if we ask in what conditions cinema draws
out the consequences of the talkie, and so becomes truly talking,
everything is inverted: this is when the sound itself becomes the
object of a specific framing which imposes an interstice with the
visual framing. The notion of voice-off tends to disappear in
favour of a difference between what is seen and what is heard,

Thought and cinema                                                    181
and this difference is constitutive of the image. There is no more
out-of-field. The outside of the image is replaced by the interstice
between the two frames in the image (here again Bresson was a
pioneer).4' Godard draws all the consequences from this when he
declares that mixing ousts montage, it being understood that
mixing does not just consist of a distribution of the different
sound elements, but the allocation of their differential relations
with the visual elements. Interstices thus proliferate everywhere,
in the visual image, in the sound image, between the sound image
and the visual image. That is not to say that the discontinuous
prevails over the continuous. On the contrary, the cuts or breaks
in cinema have always formed the power of the continuous. But
cinema and mathematics are the same here: sometimes the cut,
so-called rational, forms part of one of the two sets which it
separates (end of one or beginning of the other). This is the case
with ‘classical’ cinema. Sometimes, as in modern cinema, the cut
has become the interstice, it is irrational and does not form part of
either set, one of which has no more an end than the other has a beginning:
false continuity is such an irrational cut.4" Thus, in Godard, the
interaction of two images engenders or traces a frontier which
belongs to neither one nor the other.
   Epstein had already demonstrated that the continuous and the
discontinuous were never opposed to each other in the cinema.
What are opposed, or at least distinguished, are rather two ways
of reconciling them, according to the transformation of the
Whole. It is here that montage comes into its own. As long as the
whole is the indirect representation of time, the continuous is
reconciled with the discontinuous in the form of rational points
and according to commensurable relations (Eisenstein explicitly
found their mathematical theory in the golden section). But,
when the whole becomes the, power of the outside which passes
into the interstice, then it is the direct presentation of time, or the
continuity which is reconciled with the sequence of irrational
points, according to non-chronological time relationships. It is in
this sense that, already in Welles, then in Resnais, and also in
Godard, montage takes on a new sense, determining relations in
the direct time-image, and reconciling the cut-up with the
sequence shot. We have seen that the power of thought gave way,
then, to an unthought in thought, to an irrational proper to
thought, a point of outside beyond the outside world, but capable
of restoring our belief in the world. The question is no longer:
does cinema give us the illusion of the world? But: how does

182                                                          Cinema 2
cinema restore our belief in the world? This irrational point is the
unsummonable of Welles, the inexplicable of Robbe-Grillet, the
undecidable of Resnais, the impossible of Marguerite Duras, or
again what might be called the incommensurable of Godard
(between two things).
   There is another consequence, correlative to the change of
status of the whole. What is correlatively produced is a dislocation
of the internal monologue. According to Eisenstein’s musical
conception, the internal monologue constituted a descriptive
material loaded with features of visual and sound expression
which were associated or linked together with each other: each
image had a dominant tonality, but also harmonics which defined
its possibilities of harmony and metaphor (there was metaphor
when two images had the same harmonics). There was thus a
whole of the film which encompassed the author, the world and
the characters, whatever the differences or contrasts. The
author’s way of seeing, that of the characters, and the way in
which the world was seen formed a signifying unity, working
through figures which were themselves significant. A first blow to
this conception was struck when the internal monologue lost its
personal or collective unity, and shattered into anonymous
debris: stereotypes, clichés, ready-made visions and formulas
took away the outside world and the interiority of characters in
the same decomposition. The Married Woman merged with the
pages of the weekly that she was flicking through, and with a
catalogue of ‘spare parts’. The internal monologue exploded
under the weight of the same poverty on the inside and the
outside: this was the transformation that Dos Passos had intro­
duced into the novel, by already invoking cinematographic
methods, and which Godard was to bring to completion in A
Married Woman. But this was only the negative or critical aspect of
a more profound and more im portant positive transformation.
From this other perspective, the internal monologue gives way to
sequences of images, each sequence being independent, and each
image in the sequence standing for itself in relation to the
preceding and following ones: a different descriptive material.
There are no longer any perfect and ‘resolved’ harmonies, but
only dissonant tunings or irrational cuts, because there are no
more harmonics of the image, but only ‘unlinked’ tones forming
the series. What disappears is all metaphor or figure. The
formula in Weekend, ‘it’s not blood, it’s red’, signifies that blood has
ceased to be a harmonic of red, and that this red is the unique tone

Thought and cinema                                             183
of blood. One must speak and show literally, or else not show
and speak at all. If, according to ready-made formulas, the
revolutionaries are at our doors, besieging us like cannibals, they
must be shown in the scrub of Seine-et-Oise, eating human flesh.
If bankers are killers, schoolchildren prisoners, photographers
pimps, if the workers are being screwed by their bosses, this has
to be shown, not ‘metaphorized’, and series have to be con­
structed in consequence. If it is said that a weekly does not ‘stand
up’ in its advertising pages, this has to be shown, literally, by
tearing them out so as to let us see that the weekly no longer
stands upright: this is no longer a metaphor but a demonstration
(Six fois deux).
   With Godard, the ‘unlinked’ image (this was Artaud’s term)
becomes serial and atonal, in a precise sense.'15' The problem of
the relation between images is no longer of knowing if it works
or it does not work ga va ou si a va pas], according to the
                      [ jz            p
requirements of the harmonics or of the resolved tunings, but of
knowing How it’s going [Comment ga va]. Like this or like that,
‘how it’s going’ [comment ga va] is the constitution of series, of
their irrational cuts, of their dissonant tunings, of their unlinked
terms. Each series refers to a way of seeing or speaking, for its
own purposes, a wmy which may be that of current opinion
operating through slogans, but equally that of a class, a sort, a
typical charagter operating through thesis, hypothesis, paradox
or even pretended cleverness, abrupt change of subject. Each
series will be the way in which the author expresses himself
indirectly in a sequence of images attributable to another, or,
conversely, the way in which something or someone is expressed
indirectly in the vision of the author considered as other. In any
case, there is no longer the unity of the author, the characters
and the world such as was guaranteed by the internal monolo­
gue. There is formation of ‘free indirect discourse’, of a free
indirect vision, which goes from one to the other, so that either
the author expresses himself through the intercession of an
autonomous, independent character other than the author or
any role fixed by the author, or the character acts and speaks
himself as if his own gestures and his own words were already
reported by a third party. The first case is that of the cinema
incorrecdy called ‘direct’, of Rouch and Perrault; the second,
that of an atonal cinema, in Bresson, in Rohmer.5" In short,
Pasolini had a profound insight about modern cinema when he
characterized it by a sliding of ground, breaking the uniformity

184                                                       Cinema 2
of the internal monologue to replace it by the diversity, the
deformity, the otherness of a free indirect discourse.
   Godard has used every method of free indirect vision. Not that
he has limited himself to borrowing and renewing; on the
contrary, he created the original method which allowed him to
make a new synthesis, and in so doing to identify himself with
modern cinema. If we are looking for the most general formula
for the series in Godard, we should call every sequence of images
in so far as it is reflected in a genre a series. An entire film may
correspond to a dominant genre, as Une femme est une femme does
to musical comedy, or Made in USA does to the strip cartoon. But
even in this case the film moves through sub-genres, and the
general rule is that there are several genres, hence several series.
The passage from one genre to the next day may be through
straight discontinuity, or equally in an imperceptible and con­
tinuous manner with ‘intercalary genres’, or again through
recurrence or feedback,’2* with electronic procedures (new
possibilities are opening everywhere for montage). This reflective
status of genre has important consequences: instead of genre
subsuming images which naturally belong to it, it constitutes the
limit of images which do not belong to it but cire reflected in it.’3
Amengual rightly pointed this out for Une femme est une femme:
whilst dance, in a classical musical comedy, informs all the images,
even preparatory or intercalary ones, it arises here, in contrast, as
a ‘moment’ in the behaviour of the heroes, as the limit towards
which a sequence of images is moving, a limit ¿vhich will be
realized only by forming another sequence moving towards
another limit.’4This is the case of dance not only in Unefemme. . .,
but in the café scene in Bande á part, or that of the pinewood in
Pierrot le fou, a passage from the wander-genre to the balladgenre.” * These are three great moments in Godard’s work.
Losing its capacities for subsuming or constituting in favour of a
free power of reflection, genre may be said to be all the purer for
marking the direction of pre-existing images, more than the
character of the present images (Amengual shows that the
scenery of Une femme. . ., the great square pillar in the middle of
the bedroom and the patch of white wall between two doors,
contributes all the more to dance in that it ‘demolishes what is
danced’, in a kind of pure and empty reflection which gives the
virtual a specific reality: the virtualities of the heroine).
   Godard’s reflexive genres, in this sense, are genuine categories
through which the film passes. And the table of montage is

Thought and cinema                                                 185
conceived as a table of categories. There is something Aristotelian
in Godard. Godard’s films are syllogisms, which simultaneously
integrate degrees of probability and paradoxes of logic. It is not a
matter of a cataloguing procedure or one of ‘collage’, as Aragon
suggested, but of a method of constitution of series, each marked
by a category (the types of series can be very varied). It is as if
Godard were taking the reverse route to the one we followed
earlier, and was finding ‘theorems’ at the edge o f‘problems’. The
mathematician Bouligand distinguished, as two inseparable in­
stances, on the one hand problems and on the other theorems or
the overall synthesis: while problems impose conditions of series
on unknown elements, overall synthesis fixes categories from
where these elements are extracted (points, straight lines, curves,
planes, spheres, etc.);>h Godard is constantly creating categories:
hence the very special role of discourse in many of his films
where, as Daney noted, one genre of discourse always leads to a
discourse of a different genre. Godard goes from problems to
categories, even if the categories end up presenting him with a
problem again. For instance, the structure of Slow Motion: the
four great categories, ‘the Imaginary’, ‘Fear’, ‘Business', ‘Music’,
lead to a new problem, ‘What is passion?’, ‘Passion is not this . . . ’,
which is to be the object of the next film.
   According to Godard, categories are not fixed once and for all.
They are redistributed, reshaped and reinvented for each film. A
montage of categories, which is new each time, corresponds to a
cutting of categories. The categories must, each time, surprise us,
and yet not be arbitrary, must be well founded, and must have
strong, indirect relations between themselves: they must not be
derived from each other, so that their relation is of the ‘And
type, this ‘and’ must achieve necessity. It is often the case that the
written word indicates the category, while the visual images
constitute the series: hence the very special primacy of the word
over the image and the presentation of the screen as blackboard.
And, in the written phrase, the conjunction ‘and’ can assume an
isolated and magnified value (Ici et ailleurs). This re-creation of
the interstice does not necessarily mark a discontinuity between
the series of images: we can pass without break from one series to
another, at the same time as the relation of one category to the
next becomes unrealizable, as we pass from the wandering
[balade] to the ballad [ballade] in Pierrot lefou, or from daily life to
the theatre in Une femme est une femme, or from the housework
scene to the epic in Le mépris. O r again, the written word can be the

186                                                         Cinema 2
object of an electronic processing introducing mutation, recur­
rence and retroaction (as already on the notebook in Pierrot lefou,
la. . . rt is changed into la mort.:" Categories, then, are never final
answers but categories of problems which introduce reflection
into the image itself. They are problematic or prepositional
functions. Henceforth, the question for each of Godard’s films is:
what performs the function of categories or of reflexive genres?
In the simplest case, it can be aesthetic genres, the epic, theatre,
the novel, dance, cinema itself. It is characteristic of cinema to
reflect itself, and reflect the other genres, without the visual
images referring to a pre-established dance, novel, theatre, or
film, but themselves setting out to ‘do’ cinema, to do dance, to do
novel, to do theatre, throughout a series, for an episode.”1The
categories of genres can also be psychic faculties (imagination,
memory, forgetting . . . ). But sometimes the category or genre
assumes much more unusual aspects, for example in the wellknown interventions of reflexive types, that is, original indi­
viduals who exhibit for what it is, in its singularity, the limit
towards which a given series of visual images was moving and
would move in the future: these are thinkers, like Jean-Pierre
Melville in Breathless, Brice Parain in Vivre sa vie, Jeanson in La
Chinoise; they are burlesque like Devos or the queen of the
Lebanon in Pierrot lefou\ they are examples like the extras in Two
or Three Things I Know About Her (my name is this, I do this, I like
th at. . .). They are all interceders who function as a category, by
giving it a complete individuation: the most moving example is
perhaps the intervention of Brice Parain who exhibits and
individuates the category of language, as the limit towards which
the heroine was moving, with all her energy, through the series of
images (the problem of Nana).
   In short, the categories can be words, things, acts, people. Les
carabiniers is not another film about war, to glorify or attack it. It
films the categories of war, which is something quite different.
Now, as Godard says, these can be specific things, armies of sea,
earth and air, or ‘specific ideas’, occupation, countryside, resist­
ance, or ‘specific feelings’, violence, rout, absence of passion,
derision, disorder, surprise, void, or ‘specific phenomena’, noise,
silence.39 It will be noted that colours themselves can fulfil the
function of categories. Not only do they affect things and people,
and even written words; but they form categories in themselves:
red is one in Weekend. If Godard is a great colourist, it is because
he uses colours as great, individuated genres in which the image is

Thought and cinema                                                187
reflected. This is Godard’s consistent method in the films in
colour (unless there is rather reflection in music, or in both at
once). The Letter to Freddy Buache releases the chromatic pro­
cedure in the pure state: there is the high and the low, the blue,
celestial Lausanne, and the green, terrestrial and aquatic Lau­
sanne. Two curves or peripheries, and, between the two, there is
grey, the centre, the straight lines. The colours have become
almost mathematical categories in which the town reflects its
images and makes a problem out of them. Three series, three
states of matter, the problem of Lausanne. All the technical
aspects of the film, its high-angle shots, low-angle shots, halts on
the image, are at the service of this reflection. He will be criticized
for not having fulfilled the brief of a film ‘about’ Lausanne: this is
because he has inverted the relation between Lausanne and the
colours; he has made Lausanne pass into the colours as on a table
of categories which was, however, applicable only to Lausanne.
This is definitely constructivism: he has reconstructed Lausanne
with colours, the discourse of Lausanne, its indirect vision.
   Cinema ceases to be narrative, but it is with Godard that it
becomes the most ‘novelesque’. As Pierrot le fou puts it, ‘Next
chapter. Despair. Next chapter. Freedom. Bitterness.’ Bakhtine
defined the novel, in contrast to the epic or tragedy, as no longer
having the collective or distributive unity through which the
characters still spoke one and the same language. On the
contrary, the novel necessarily borrows sometimes the everyday
anonymous language, sometimes the language of a class, a group,
a profession, sometimes the particular language of a character.
To the extent that the characters, classes and genres form the free
indirect discourse of the author, as much as the author forms
their free indirect vision (what they see, what they know or do not
know). O r rather the characters express themselves freely in the
author’s discourse-vision, and the author, indirectly, in that of the
characters. In short, it is reflection in genres, anonymous or
personified, which constitutes the novel, its ‘plurilingualism’, its
speech and its vision.6'1 Godard gives cinema the particular
powers of the novel. He provides himself with the reflexive types
as so many interceders through whom I is always another. It is a
broken line, a zig-zag line, which brings together the author, his
characters and the world, and which passes between them. Thus
modern cinema develops new relations with thought from three
points of view: the obliteration of a whole or of a totalization of
images, in favour of an outside which is inserted between them;

188                                                     Cinema 2
the erasure of the internal monologue as whole of the film, in
favour of a free indirect discourse and vision; the erasure of the
unity of man and the world, in favour of a break which now leaves
us with only a belief in this world.

8     Cinema, body and brain,
      thought

                                  1
‘Give me a body then’: this is the formula of philosophical
reversal. T he body is no longer the obstacle that separates
thought from itself, that which it has to overcome to reach
thinking. It is on the contrary that which it plunges into or must
plunge into, in order to reach the unthought, that is life. Not that
the body thinks, but, obstinate and stubborn, it forces us to think,
and forces us to think what is concealed from thought, life. Life
will no longer be made to appear before the categories of
thought; thought will be thrown into the categories of life. The
categories of life are precisely the attitudes of the body, its
postures. ‘We do not even know what a body can do’:in its sleep, in
its drunkenness, in its efforts and resistances. To think is to learn
what a non-thinking body is capable of, its capacity, its postures. It
is through the body (and no longer through the intermediary of
the body) that cinema forms its alliance with the spirit, with
thought. ‘Give me a body then’ is first to mount the camera on an
everyday body. T he body is never in the present, it contains the
before and the after, tiredness and waiting. Tiredness and
waiting, even despair are the attitudes of the body. No one has
gone further than Antonioni in this direction. His method: the
interior through behavior, no longer experience, but ‘what
remains of past experiences’, ‘what comes afterwards, when
everything has been said’, such a method necessarily proceeds via
the attitudes or postures of the body.1 This is a time-image, the
series of time. The daily attitude is what puts the before and after
into the body, time into the body, the body a^a revealer of the
deadline. The attitude of the body relates thought to time as to
that outside which is infinitely further than the outside world.
Perhaps tiredness is the first and last attitude, because it simul­
taneously contains the before and the after: what Blanchot says is
also what Antonioni shows, not the drama of communication, but
the immense tiredness of the body, the tiredness there is beneath
The Outcry, and which suggests to thought ‘something to incommunicate’, the ‘unthought’, life.

190                                                        Cinema 2
    But there is another pole to the body, another cinema-bodythought link. ‘To give’ a body, to mount a camera on the body,
takes on a different sense: it is no longer a matter of following and
trailing the everyday body, but of making it pass through a
ceremony, of introducing it into a glass cage or a crystal, of
imposing a carnival or a masquerade on it which makes it into a
grotesque body, but also brings out of it a gracious and glorious
body, until at last the disappearance of the visible body is
achieved.Carmelo Bene is one of the greatest constructors of
crystal-images: the palace in Notre-Dame des Turcs floats in the
image, or ratheV it is the whole image which moves or throbs,
reflections take on a violent colour, the colours themselves
crystallize in Don Juan, in the dance of the veils in Capricci where
the material comes between the dancer and the camera. Eyes
haunt the crystal, like the eye in the monstrance, but what we are
first allowed to see are the skeletons in Notre-Dame, the old men in
Capricci, the old, decrepit saint in Salome, who exhaust themselves
with useless gestures endlessly taken up again, with constantly
inhibited and recommenced attitudes, up to the impossible
posture (the Christ in Salome who can’t manage to crucify himself
ajone: how could the last hand nail itself?). The ceremony in Bene
begins with parody, which affects the sounds as much as the
gestures, for gestures are also vocal, and apraxia and aphasia are
the two sides of the same posture. But what emerges from the
grotesque, what is torn from it, is the gracious body of woman as
superior mechanic, whether she dances among the old men, or
goes through the stylized attitudes of a secret wish, or becomes
fixed in an attitude of ecstasy. Is this not done in order finally to
 free the third body, that of the ‘protagonist’, or master of
ceremonies, who passes through all the other bodies? It is already
 his eye which was sliding into the crystal, it is he who communi­
cates with the crystalline setting, as in Notre-Dame where the
 history of the palace becomes an autobiography of the protagon­
 ist. It is he who takes up inhibited or incomplete gestures, as in
Notre-Dame where he is continually missing his own death, a
 totally bandaged mummy who can no longer give himself an
 injection, the impossible posture. It is he who must desecrate the
 gracious body, or use it in some respect, in order finally to acquire
 the power to disappear, like the poet in Capricci who looks for the
 best position to die in. To disappear is already Salome’s obscure
 desire, when she went away, back turned, towards the moon. But,
 when the protagonist takes up everything in this way, it is because

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                  191
he has reached that point of non-desire which now defines the
pathetic, the Schopenhaurian point, Hamlet's point in Un Hamlet
de moins, the point where the visible body disappears. What is
freed in non-desire is music and speech, their intertwining in a
body which is now only sound, a body of new opera. Even aphasia
then becomes the noble and musical language. It is no longer the
characters who have a voice, it is the voices, or rather the vocal
modes of the protagonist (whisper, breathing, shout, eruc­
tation . . .) which become the sole, true characters in the
ceremony in what has become a musical setting: as in the
prodigious monologues of Herod Antipas in Salomé, which rise
from his leprosy-covered body, and which carry out the sound
powers of the cinema.2 In this undertaking, Carmelo Bene must
be the director closest to Artaud. He has the same experience: he
‘believes’ in cinema, he believes that cinema can bring about a
more profound theatricalization than theatre itself, but he only
believes this for a short time. He soon thinks that theatre is more
capable of renewing itself, and freeing sound powers, than a still
limited, over-visual cinema, even if this means that the
theatricalization has to include electronic rather than cinemato­
graphic aids. None the less he believed in it for a while, the time of
a work too soon interrupted, voluntarily interrupted: the capacity
that cinema would have to give a body, that is, to make it, to bring
about its birth and disappearance in a ceremony, in a liturgy. It is
perhaps here that we shall be able to grasp a stake in the
theatre-cinema relationship.
   These two poles, the everyday body and the ceremonial body,
are discovered or rediscovered in experimental cinema. The
latter is not necessarily more advanced; it can even come
afterwards. The difference between experimental cinema and
the other cinema is that the form er experiments, whilst the other
discovers, by virtue of a different necessity from that of the filmic
process. In experimental cinema, sometimes the process mounts
the camera on the everyday body; these are Warhol’s famous
essays, six and half hours on the man asleep in a fixed shot,
three-quarters of an hour on the man eating a mushroom (Sleep,
Eat)? Sometimes, on the contrary, this cinema of the body mounts
a ceremony, takes on an initiatory and liturgical aspect, and
attempts to summon all the metallic and liquid powers of a sacred
body, to the point of honour or revulsion, as in the essays of the
Vienna school, Brus, Müehl and Nitsch.'1But can we talk in terms
of opposite poles except in extreme cases which are not

192                                                          Cinema 2
necessarily the most successful? In the best instances, the every­
day body might rather be said to lend itself to a ceremony which,
perhaps, will never arrive, to prepare itself for a ceremony which,
perhaps, will consist of waiting: as in the long preparation of the
couple in Mechanics of Love by Maas and Moore, or that of the
prostitute in Flesh by Morrissey and Warhol. By making mar­
ginals the characters of its cinema, the underground provided
itself with the methods of an everydayness which continually
leaked from the preparations for a stereotype ceremony, drugs,
prostitution, transvestism. Attitudes and postures pass into this
slow, everyday theatricalization of the body, as in Flesh, one of the
finest of these films, with its fatigues and expectations, but also
with the moment of relaxation, the game of three fundamental
bodies, man woman, and child.
   What is important is less the difference between poles than the
passage from one to another, the imperceptible passage of
attitudes or postures to ‘gest’. It is Brecht who created the notion
of gest, making it the essence of theatre, irreducible to the plot or
the ‘subject’: for him,the gest should be social, although he
recognizes that there are other kinds of gest. ’ What we call gest in
general is the link or knot of attitudes between themselves, their
co-ordination with each other, in so far as they do not depend on a
previous story, a pre-existing plot or an action-image. On the
contrary, the gest is the development of attitudes themselves,
and, as such, carries out a direct theatricalization of bodies, often
very discreet, because it takes place independently of any role.
The greatness of Cassavetes’s work is to have undone the story,
plot, or action,but also space, in order to get to attitudes as to cate­
gories which put time into the body, as well as thought into life.
When Cassavetes says that characters must not come from a story
or plot, but that the story should be secreted by the characters, he
sums up the requirement of the cinema of bodies: the character is
reduced to his own bodily attitudes, and what ought to result is
the gest, that is, a ‘spectacle’, a theatricalization or dramatization
which is valid for all plots. Faces is constructed on the attitudes of
the bodies presented as faces going as far as the grimace,
expressing waiting, fatigue, vertigo and depression. And on the
basis of the attitudes of blacks, and the attitudes of whites, Shadows
revealed the social gest which forms around the attitude of the
white Negro, put in a position where it is impossible to choose,
lonely, on the verge of evanescence. Comolli speaks of a cinema of
revelation,-where the only constraint is that of bodies, and the only

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                  193
logic that of linkages of attitudes: characters ‘are constituted
gesture by gesture and word by word, as the film proceeds; they
construct themselves, the shooting acting on them like a revel­
ation, each advancement of the film allowing them a new
development in their behaviour, their own duration very pre­
cisely coinciding with that of the film’.fi And, in the succeeding
films, the spectacle can pass through a script: the point of this is
less to tell a story than to develop and transform bodily attitudes,
as in A Woman under the Influence', or in Gloria, where the
abandoned child sticks to the body of the woman who first tries to
push it away. In Love Streams, there is the brother and sister: the
first can only experience his existence in an amassing of female
bodies; the other in an amassing of luggage, or of animals which
she offers to the brother. How can one exist, personally, if one
cannot do so all alone? How can something be made to pass
through these packets of body, which are at once both obstacle
and means? Every time, space is made up of these excrescences of
body, girls, luggage, animals, in search of a ‘current’ which would
pass from one body to the next. But the lonely sister will leave on a
dream, and the brother will remain under a hallucination: a
hopeless story. As a general rule, Cassavetes keeps only the parts
of space connected to bodies; he composes space with disconnec­
ted bits solely linked by a gest. This is association of images being
replaced by formal linkage of attitudes.
   The new wave, in France, has taken this cinema of attitudes and
postures (whose model actor would be Jean-Pierre Léaud) a long
way. The scenery is often made according to the attitudes of the
body that it demands and the degrees of freedom that it allows
them, like the flat in Le mépris or the bedroom in Vivre sa vie, in
Godard. Embracing, striking, intertwining and bumping bodies
animate major scenes as in First Name Carmen again, where the two
lovers attempt to grab each other in doors or windows.' Not only
do bodies bang into each other, but the camera bangs against the
bodies, in Passion each body not only has its space, but also its
light. The body is sound as well as visible, all the components of
the image come together on the body. Daney’s formula when he
defines Ici et ailleurs —restore images to the bodies on which they
have been taken —applies to the whole of Godard’s cinema and to
the new wave. Ici et ailleurs does it politically, but the other films
have at least a politics of the image, to restore the image to the
attitudes and postures of the body. A characteristic image is that
of a body leant against a wall, which lets itself go and falls to a

194                                                          Cinema 2
sitting position on the ground in a sliding of postures. Through­
out his work, Rivette elaborates a formula where cinema, theatre
and theatricality specific to cinema confront each other: L ’amour
partene is its most perfect expression, that becomes dull as soon as
it is presented in a theoretical way, whilst it sets in motion the most
supple combinations. The characters are rehearsing a play; but
the rehearsal precisely implies that they have not yet achieved the
theatrical attitudes which correspond to the roles and to the plot
of the play which goes beyond them; on the contrary, they resort
to para-theatrical attitudes which they assume in relation to the
play, in relation to their role, and each in relation to the others,
and these second attitudes are all the purer and more indepen­
dent for being free from all pre-existing plot, which exists only in
the play. These attitudes will thus secrete a gest which is neither
real nor imaginary, neither everyday nor ceremonial, but on the
boundary between the two, and which will point from this
position to the functioning of a truly visionary or hallucinatory
sense (the magic sweet in Celine and Julie Go Boating, the
magician’s projections in L'amour par terre). It is as if the characters
spring to life again on the walls of the theatre, and discover pure
attitudes as independent of the theatrical role as they are of a real
action, although echoing both of them. One of the finest
instances, in Rivette, is L ’amourfou, when the couple enclosed in a
room take up and pass through all the postures, a refuge-posture,
an aggressive posture, an amorous posture . . . It is a marvellous
demonstration of postures. In this sense, Rivette invents a
theatricality of cinema totally distinct from the theatricality of the
theatre (even when cinema uses it as a reference).
    Godard’s solution is different, and seems at first sight simpler:
it is, as we have seen, that characters begin to play for themselves,
to dance and to mimic for themselves, in a theatricalization which
directly extends their everyday attitudes. The character makes a
theatre for himself. In Pierrot lefou we continually move from the
attitude of the body to the theatrical gest which joins the attitudes
together and produces further ones, up to the final suicide which
absorbs all the others. In Godard, the attitudes of body are the
categories of the spirit itself, and the gest is the thread which goes
from one category to another. Les carabiniers is the Gesture of
war. The gest is necessarily social and political, following Brecht’s
requirements, but it is necessarily something different as well (for
Rivette as much as Godard). It is bio-vital, metaphysical and
aesthetic.8 For Godard, in Passion, the postures of the boss, the

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                  195
female owner, and the female worker, refer to a pictorial or
para-pictorial gest. And in First Name Carmen, the attitudes of
body continually refer to a musical gest which co-ordinates them
independently of the plot; which takes them up and subjects to
them to a higher linkage, but also frees all their potentialities; the
rehearsals of the quartet are not limited to developing and
directing the sound qualities of the image, but also the visual
qualities, in the sense that the curve of the violinist’s arm modifies
the movement of the bodies which are embracing. The fact is that,
in Godard, sounds and colours are attitudes of the body, that is,
categories: they thus find their thread in the aesthetic composi­
tion which passes through them, no less than in the social and
political organization which underpins them. First Name Carmen,
from the outset, makes sounds depend on a body which collides
with things, and collides with itself, bangs itself on the head.
Godard’s cinema goes from the attitudes of the body, visual and
sound, to the pluri-dimensional, pictorial and musical gest, which
constitutes their ceremony, liturgy and aesthetic organization.
This was already true of Slow Motion, where music constituted the
virtual directional thread going from one attitude to another,
‘What is that music?’, before it is revealed for itself, at the end of
the film. The attitude of the body is like a time-image, the one
which pùts the before and the after in the body, the series of time;
but the gest is already a different time-image, the order or
organization of time, the simultaneity of its peaks, the coexistence
of its sheets. In the passage from one to the other, Godard thus
achieves a great complexity. All the more because he may follow
the reverse procedure, and begin from a continuous gest initially
given, in order to break it up into attitudes or categories: as in the
halts on the image in Slow Motion (Where does the caress end and
the slap begin? Where does the embrace end and the struggle
begin?).HThere is not only the gest ‘between’ two attitudes; there
is also the sound and the visual in the attitudes and in the gest and
‘between’ the attitudes and the gest itself, and inversely: as, again,
in the visual and sound breaking down of the pornographic
postures.
   The post-new wave will continually work and invent in these
directions: the attitudes and postures of the body, the valorizing
of what happens on the ground or in bed, the speed and violence
of co-ordination, the ceremony or theatre of cinema which is
revealed (Chéreau’s La chair de l’orchidée and especially his
L ’homme blessé are already very powerful in this respect). Certainly

196                                                        Cinema 2
the cinema of bodies does not proceed without risk: a glorification
of marginal characters who make their daily life into an insipid
ceremony; a cult of gratuitous violence in the linkage of postures;
a cultivation of catatonic, hysterical or simply refuge-attitudes —
Godard makes a kind of parody of these at the beginning of First
Name Carmen. And we end up being tired of all these bodies who
slide along the wall and then find themselves squatting on the
ground. But since the new wave, every time there was a fine and
powerful film, there was a new exploration of the body in it.
Starting with Jeanne Dielman, Chantai Akerman wants to show
‘gestures in their fullness’. Enclosed in the bedroom, the heroine
of Je Tu II Elle links involutive refuge- and infantile postures in a
mode which is that of waiting, counting the days: a ceremony of
anorexia. Chantai Akerman’s novelty lies in showing in this way
bodily attitudes as the sign of states of body particular to the
female character, whilst the men speak for society, the environ­
ment, the part which is their due, the piece of history which they
bring with them (Anna’s Rendezvous). But the chain of states of
female body is not closed: descending from the mother or going
back to the mother, it serves as a revelation to men, who now talk
about themselves, and on a deeper level to the environment,
which now makes itself seen or heard only through the window of
a room, or a train, a whole art of sound. In the same place or in
space, a woman’s body achieves a strange nomadism which makes
it cross ages, situations and places (this was Virginia Woolfs secret
in literature). The states of the body secrete the slow ceremony
which joins together the corresponding attitudes, and develop a
female gest which overcomes the history of men and the crisis of
the world. It is this gest which reacts on the body giving it a
hieratism like an austere theatricalization, or rather a ‘stylization’.
Whether it is possible to avoid the excess of stylization which
tends, in the end, to enclose film and character is the problem that
Chantai Akerman herself poses.10 The gest may become more
burlesque, without concealing anything, and pass on to the film a
lightness, an irresistable gaiety: already in Toute une nuit, but
especially in the episode in Paris vu par.. .20 ans après, whose title
 itself stimulates the whole of Akerman’s work, ‘I am hungry, I am
 cold’, the states of body have become burlesque, sources of a
 ballad.
    Female authors, female directors, do not owe their importance
 to a militant feminism. What is more important is the way they
 have produced innovations in this cinema of bodies, as if women

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                 197
had to conquer the source of their own attitudes and the
temporality which corresponds to them as individual or common
gest (Cleo from 5 to 7, One Sings, the Other Doesn't by Agnès Varda,
Mon coeur est rouge by Michèle Rosier). With Mur murs and
Documenteur, Varda constructs a diptych whose second part
presents the day-to-day attitudes and gestures of a woman lost in
Los Angeles, while the first part shows, in the eyes of another
woman walking in the same city, the historical and political gest of
a minority community, murals by Chicanoes in exasperated
shapes and colours.
   The cinema of the body or of attitudes also took new directions.
From Le cochon and La rosière de Pessac, Eustache filmed cyclical
festivals integrating collective attitudes and constituting a social
gest. There was undoubtedly a whole context, an organization of
power, of political aims, a whole history surrounding these
ceremonies, in these ceremonies. But, following the lesson of
cinéma-vérité, this history would not be told: it would be revealed,
and all the more so for being less shown; the only thing to be
shown would be the way the attitudes of the body are co­
ordinated in the ceremony, so as to reveal what did not allow itself
to be shown." Eustache’s cinema was henceforth to develop in
several directions. The attitude of the body was no less vocal than
gestural, one of the principal aims of cinema being, as Philippon
puts it, tofilm speech. Attitudes and postures would engender their
gest through a power of the false, from which bodies sometimes
hid themselves, and to which they sometimes gave themselves
fully, but always being confronted in this way with the pure act of
cinema. If the attitude had been made to be seen and heard, it
necessarily referred to a voyeur and a listener who were equally
postures of the body and also attitudes, to the extent that the gest
was made up of the attitude and its voyeur, and vice versa,
likewise for speech. In the end, the diptych became the funda­
mental form of cinema, in very varied shapes but each time
having the effect of putting time into bodies. Eustache was to
make a second Rosière de Pessac years later, to confront and
co-ordinate them on the basis of the second: ‘It is the idea of time
which interests me.’ Mes petites amoureuses was organized as a
diptych of which the first panel showed the attitudes of childish
bodies, in the countryside, but the second, the ‘false’ adolescent
attitudes of which the child , in the city, was now only the voyeur
or hearer, until he returns to the countryside, having grown up
with his new knowledge. Une sale histoire constituted the two

198                                                         Cinema 2
degrees where on both sides, attitude and speech, hearer and
voyeur were joined together. All these aspects already made The
Mother and the Whore a masterpiece of the cinema of bodies, of
their gestural and vocal attitudes.
   If modern cinema has been constructed on the ruins of the
sensory-motor schema or of the action-image, it finds in the
‘posture-voyeurism’ couple a new element which functions all the
better because the postures are innocent. The richness of such a
cinema cannot be exhausted by one author, Akerman or Eustache. It is an abundance, in which only different styles can be
recognized, and which founds the unity of a category (‘the
post-new wave’) by passing through very different authors.
Faux-fuyants, by Bergala and Limosin can be mentioned, as
showing a strange ceremony, which consists, for an adult (the
man with the camera?), of inspiring and co-ordinating only
attitudes of the body in young people of whom he makes himself
the voyeur, constituting a gest which links all the unexpected
offences of flight, and replaces narration, from one crime to the
next.12 With La drôlesse, Jacques Doillon made an important film
of postures, a mentally handicapped man took a wild little girl
and subjected her to the innocent attitudes imposed by the décor
of a barn, lying down, sitting down, eating, sleeping, under the
surveillance of a fake viewing appparatus ineptly stuck together
(it would be the police’s business not to believe this, and to invent a
non-existent story, that is, an action film with abduction and
rape). And in most of his films, from Doigts dans la tête, which takes
up a theme related to The Mother and the Whore, to La pirate, which
 pushes attitudes of body to a frenzy under the gaze of a stern
watching little girl, Doillon uses a very supple diptych form,
which is able to show the postural poles between which the body
 oscillates. Each time, the stylization of attitudes forms a theatricalization of cinema which is very different from theatre. But it is
 Philippe Garrel who goes furthest in this direction, because he
 provides himself with a genuine liturgy of bodies, because he
 restores them to a secret ceremony whose only characters are now
 Mary, Joseph and the Child, or their equivalents (Le lit de la vierge,
Marie pour mémoire, Le révélateur, L ’enfant secret). This is hardly a
 pious cinema, even though it is a cinema of revelation. If the
 ceremony is secret, it is precisely because Garrel takes the three
 characters ‘before’ the legend, before they have made a legend or
 constituted a holy story: the question posed by Godard, ‘What did
Joseph and Mary say to each other before having the baby?’, not

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                   199
only heralds a project of Godard’s but sums up Garrel’s experi­
ences. The theatrical hieratism of characters, noticeable in his
first films, is increasingly focused on a physics of fundamental
bodies. What Garrel expresses in cinema, is the problem of the
three bodies: the man, the woman and the child. The holy story as
gesture. The fine opening of Le révélateur lets us guess that there is
a child perched in the dark on top of the wardrobe, then shows
the door opening on to the over-exposed silhouette of the father,
and finally reveals, in front of him, the mother on her knees. Each
will embrace one of the other two, in three combinations, in a big
bed which resembles a cloud on the floor. Sometimes, the
constantly invoked child is missing (Marie pour mémoire) or is a
different one from the one we see (L’enfant secret): this is the sign
that the problem of the three bodies remains cinematographically
as well as physically insoluble. The child is in himself the
problematic point. It is around him that the gest is composed, as
in the episode in Paris vu par. . .20 ans après (‘Rue Fontaine’): the
first attitude is that of the man in the middle of telling the story of
a woman who said ‘I want a child’ and who disappeared; the
second, that of the same man sitting in a woman’s house and
waiting; the third, they become lovers, attitudes and postures; the
fourth, they have split up, he wants to see her again, but she tells
him that she had a child who died; the fifth, he learns that she has
been found dead herself, and he kills himself, his body toppling
slowly over in a long image to become one with snow, as in a
posture which has no end. The child thus appears as the
undecidable point in terms of which the attitudes of a man and a
woman are distributed. In Garrel as well, the diptych form is thus
imposed, around an empty turning-point, unattainable limit, or
irrational cut. It distributes not only attitudes, but the white and
black, the cold and hot, as the conditions on which attitudes
depend or the elements of which the bodies are made. There are
the two coloured rooms, on each side of the bed, the cold one and
the warm one, in La concentration. There are the two big
 landscapes in the Lit de la vierge, the white Arab village and the
 dark Brittany castle, the mystery of Christ and the quest for the
 Grail. There are the two quite distinct parts of Liberté la nuit, the
 black image of the couple where the man betrays the woman (the
 deserted woman who knits crying in the dark, empty theatre), the
 white image of the couple where the woman betrays the man (the
 two characters embracing in a field where the washing is drying, a
 sheet caught by the wind coming to cover them and cover the

200                                                        Cinema 2
screen). There are the alternations of hot and cold, the heat of the
fire or a light in the night, but also the cold of the white drug
caught in a m irror (as in L ’enfant secret where we see the café
window, the man with his back turned, and, in the window, the
image of the woman also from the back crossing the street and
going to meet the dealer). In Garrel, over-exposed and under­
exposed, white and black, cold and hot, became the components
of the body and the elements of its postures.13 They are the
catagories which ‘give’ a body.
   ‘The absence of image’, the black screen or the white screen,
have a decisive importance in contemporary cinema. For, as Noel
Burch has shown, they no longer have a simple function of
punctuation, as if they marked a change, but enter into a
dialectical relation between the image and its absence, and
assume a properly structural value (as in Brakhage’s Reflections on
Black in experimental cinema).14 This new value of the black or
white screen seems to us to correspond to the characteristics
analysed earlier: on the one hand, what is important is no longer
the association of images, the way in which they associate, but the
interstice between two images; on the other hand, the cut in a
sequence of images is not now a rational cut which marks the end
of one or the beginning of another, but a so-called irrational cut
which belongs neither to one nor the other, and sets out to be
valid for itself. Garrel was able to give an extraordinary intensity
to these irrational cuts, so that the series of anterior images has no
end, while the series of subsequent images likewise has no
beginning, the two series converging towards the white or black
screen as their common limit. Moreover, used in this way, the
screen becomes the medium for variations: the black screen and
the under-exposed image, the intense blackness which lets us
guess at dark volumes in process of being constituted, or the black
marked by a fixed or moving luminous point, and all the
combinations of black and fire; the white screen and the
over-exposed image, the milky image, or the snowy image whose
dancing seeds are to take shape . . . And, in L ’enfant secret, it is
often the flash which gives rise to the images and gathers together
the powers of black and white. Throughout Garrel’s films, the
black or white screen no longer has only a structural value, but has
a genetic one: with its variations and tonalities, it acquires the
power of a constitution of bodies (primordial bodies from this
point, Man, Woman and Child), the power of the genesis of
postures.1’ This may be the first case of a cinema of constitution,

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                   201
one which is truly constitutive: constituting bodies, and in this way
restoring our belief in the world, restoring our reason . . . It is
doubtful if cinema is sufficient for this; but, if the world has
become a bad cinema, in which we no longer believe, surely a true
cinema can contribute to giving us back reasons to believe in the
world and in vanished bodies? The price to be paid, in cinema as
elsewhere, was always a confrontation with madness."5
   In what sense is Garrel one of the greatest modern authors,
whose work, alas, may well develop its effects only in the long
term, endowing the cinema with powers that are as yet not well
known? We have to go back to a very old problem, which already
brought theatre and cinema into opposition. Those who deeply
loved the theatre objected that cinema always lacked something,
presence, the presence of bodies which remained the prerogative
of theatre: cinema only showed us waves and dancing corpuscles
with which it simulated bodies. When André Bazin takes up the
problem, he looks for a sense in which there is a different mode of
presence, a cinematographic one, which rivals that of theatre and
may even outdo it with different methods.17 But, if cinema does
not give us the presence of the body and cannot give us it, this is
perhaps also because it sets itself a different objective; it spreads
an ‘experimental night’ or a white space over us; it works with
‘dancing seeds’ and a ‘luminous dust’; it affects the visible with a
fundamental disturbance, and the world with a suspension,
which contradicts all natural perception. What it produces in this
way is the genesis of an ‘unknown body’ which we have in the back
of our heads, like the unthought in thought, the birth of the
visible which is still hidden from view. These responses which
change the problem are those of Jean-Louis Schefer in L ’homme
ordinaire du cinéma. They consist in saying that the object of
cinema is not to reconstitute a presence of bodies, in perception
and action, but to carry out a primordial genesis of bodies in
terms of a white, or a black or a grey (or even in terms of colours),
in terms of a ‘beginning of visible which is not yet a figure, which is
not yet an action’. Is this what Bresson’s project, Genèse, is? In any
case, we believe that what Schefer seeks rare examples of in the
history of cinema, in Dreyer and Kurosawa, is what Garrel draws
on, not for a systematic recapitulation, but as a revitalizing
inspiration which means that cinema thus coincides with its own
essence, at least with one of its essences: a proceeding, a process of
constitution of bodies from the neutral image, white or black,
snowy or flashed. The problem is not that of a presence of

202                                                        Cinema 2
bodies, but that of a belief which is capable of restoring the world
and the body to us on the basis of what signifies their absence. The
camera must invent the movements or positions which cor­
respond to the genesis of bodies, and which are the formal
linkages of their primordial postures. Garrel’s special role in the
cinema of bodies can be found in a geometry which in turn goes to
make up the world, with points, circles and semicircles. A little
like in Cézanne, the dawn of the world is linked to the point, the
plane, volume and section, not as abstract figures but as genesis
and birth. In Le révélateur, the woman is often a fixed point,
immobile and contradictory, whilst the child turns, around the
woman, around the bed, around the trees, and the man does
semicircles which maintain his relationship with the woman and
the child. In Les enfants désaccordés, the camera which is initially a
fixed point on to the dance, begins to turn around two dancers,
approaching and moving away according to their rhythm, and
the changing light; at the beginning of La cicatrice intérieure the
circular tracking shot allows the character to make a complete
turn, the camera remaining fixed on him as if it were moving
laterally to find still the same speaker; and, in Marie pour mémoire,
while Mary is imprisoned in the clinic, Joseph turns as he watches
the camera, which changes position as if it were in a succession of
different cars on a traffic interchange. On each occasion there is a
construction of space as this is attached to bodies. And what is
valid for the three fundamental bodies is also valid for the other
trinity, that of the characters, the film-maker and the camera:
placing them ‘in the best possible posture, in the sense that we say
of a configuration of stars that it is in an astrologically favourable
position’.IK
   What is special to Doillon is the situation of the body caught
between two sets, caught simultaneously in two exclusive sets.
Truffaut had opened the way (Jules and Jim, The Two English
Girls), and Eustache in The Mother and the Whore was able to
construct the particular space of the non-choice. But Doillon
renews and explores this ambiguous space. The character-body,
the apprentice baker of Doigts dans la tête, the husband of Lafemme
qui pleure, the young woman in La pirate, oscillate between two
women, or between a woman and a man, but above all between
two groupings, two modes of life, two sets demanding different
attitudes. One of the two sets can always be said to prevail: the
temporary girl sends the baker back to his constant fiancée; the
happy woman sends the man back to the crying woman, as soon as

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                 203
she realizes that she is herself only an excuse or pretext. And, in
La pirate, if the predominance does not seem fixed in advance, it
is, according to Doillon’s own pronouncements, the tendering of
a higher bid which should decide the heroine’s life, or her reserve
price. But there is something else. It is not that the character finds
himself indecisive. It appears rather that two sets are really
distinct, but that the character, or rather the body in the
character, has no way of choosing between the two. He is in an
impossible posture. The character in Doillon is in the situation of
not being able to make out the distinct: he is not psychologically
indecisive, he would be even the opposite. But the predominance
is useless to him, because he inhabits his body like a zone of
indiscernibility. Who is the mother, who is the whore? Even if it is
decided for him, this changes nothing. His body will always retain
the imprint of an undecidability which was just the passing of life.
It may be here that the cinema of the body fundamentally
contrasted with the cinema of action. The action-image presup­
poses a space in which ends, obstacles, means, subordinations, the
principle and the secondary, predominances and loathings are
distributed: a whole space which can be called ‘hodological’. But
the body is initially caught in a quite different space, where
disparate sets overlap and rival each other, without being able to
organize themselves according to sensory-motor schemata. They
fit over each other, in an overlapping of perspectives which
means that there is no way to distinguish them even though they
are distinct and also incompatible. This is space before action,
always haunted by a child, or by a clown, or by both at once. It is a
pre-hodological space, like a fluctuatio animi which does not point
to an indecision of the spirit, but to an undecidability of the body.
The obstacle does not, as in the action-image, allow itself to be
determined in relation to goals and means which would unify the
set, but is dispersed in ‘a plurality of ways of being present in the
world’, of belonging to sets, all incompatible and yet coexistent.IH
Doillon’s strength is to have made this pre-hodological space, this
space of overlappings, the special object of a cinema of bodies. He
leads his characters there; he creates this space where regression
becomes discovery (La filie prodigue). Not only does he thereby
undo the action-image of classical cinema, he reveals a non-choice
of the body as the unthought, the other side or reversal of the
spiritual choice. As in the dialogue exchanged in Godard’s Slow
Motion: ‘You choose . . . No I’m not choosing . . . You choose . ..
I’m not choosing. . . ’

204                                                          Cinema 2
                                  2
‘Give me a brain’ would be the other figure of modern cinema.
This is an intellectual cinema, as distinct from the physical
cinema. Experimental cinema is shared between these two areas:
the physics of the body, everyday or ceremonial; the formal or
informal ‘eidetics’ of the spirit (to use Bertetto’s formulation). But
experimental cinema develops the distinction according to two
processes, one concretive, the other abstractive. The abstract and
the concrete, however, are not the right criteria, in a cinema
which creates rather than experiments. We saw that Eisenstein
already laid claim to an intellectual or cerebral cinema, which he
considered to be more concrete than the physics of bodies in
Pudovkin, or physical formalism in Vertov. There is no less of the
concrete and abstract on the one side than on the other: there is as
much feeling or intensity, passion, in a cinema of the brain as in a
cinema of the body. Godard initiates a cinema of the body,
Resnais, a cinema of the brain, but one is not more abstract or
more concrete than the other. Body or brain is what cinema
demands be given to it, what it gives to itself, what it invents itself,
to construct its work according to two directions, each one of
which is simultaneously abstract and concrete. T he distinction is
thus not between the concrete and the abstract (except in
experimental cases and, even there, it is fairly consistently
confused). The intellectual cinema of the brain and the physical
cinema of the body will find the source of their distinction
elsewhere, a very variable source, whether with authors who are
attracted by one of the two poles, or with those who compose with
both of them.
   Antonioni would be the perfect example of a double composi­
tion. The unity of his work has often been sought in the
established themes of solitude and incommunicability, as charac­
teristics of the poverty of the modern world. Nevertheless,
according to him, we walk at two very different paces, one for the
body, one for the brain. In a fine passage, he explains that our
knowledge does not hesitate to renew itself, to confront great
mutations, whilst our morality and feelings remain prisoners of
unadapted values of myths that no one believes any more, and
find only poor excuses —cynical, erotic, or neurotic —for freeing
themselves. Antonioni does not criticize the modern world, in
whose possibilities he profoundly ‘believes’: he criticizes the
coexistence in the world of a modern brain and a tired, worn-out,

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                  205
neurotic body. So that his work, in a fundamental sense passes
through a dualism which corresponds to the two aspects of the
time-image: a cinema of the body, which puts all the weight of the
past into the body, all the tiredness of the world and modern
neurosis; but also a cinema of the brain, which reveals the
creativity of the world, its colours aroused by a new space-time, its
powers multiplied by artificial brains.20 If Antonioni is a great
colourist, it is because he has always believed in the colours of the
world, in the possibility of creating them, and of renewing all our
cerebral knowledge. He is not an author who moans about the
impossibility of communicating in the world. It is just that the
world is painted in splendid colours, while the bodies which
people it are still insipid and colourless. The world awaits its
inhabitants, who are still lost in neurosis. But this is one more
reason to pay attention to the body, to scrutinize its tiredness and
neurosis, to take tints from it. The unity of Antonioni’s work is the
confrontation of the body-character with his weariness and his
past, and of the brain-colour with all its future potentialities, but
the two making up one and the same world, ours, its hopes and its
despair.
   Antonioni’s formula is valid for him only, it is he who invents it.
Bodies are not destined for wearing out, any more than the brain
is desdned for novelty. But what is important is the possibility of a
cinema of the brain which brings together all the powers, as much
as the cinema of the body equally brought them together as well:
there are, then, two different styles, where the difference itself is
constantly varying, cinema of the body in Godard and cinema of
the brain in Resnais, cinema of the body in Cassavetes and cinema
of the brain in Kubrick. There is as much thought in the body as
there is shock and violence in the brain. There is an equal amount
of feeling in both of them. T he brain gives orders to the body
which is just an outgrowth of it, but the body also gives orders to
the brain which is just a part of it: in both cases, these will not be
the same bodily attitudes nor the same cerebral gest. Hence the
specificity of a cinema of the brain, in relation to that of the
cinema of bodies. If we look at KubrickVwork, we see the degree
to which it is the brain which is mis en scene. Attitudes of body
achieve a maximum level of violence, but they depend on the
brain. For, in Kubrick, the world itself is a brain, there is identity
of brain and world, as in the great circular and luminous table in
Doctor Strangelove, the giant computer in 2001 A Space Odyssey, the
Overlook hotel in The Shining. The black stone of 2001 presides

206                                                           Cinema 2
over both cosmic states and cerebral stages: it is the soul of the
three bodies, earth, sun and moon, but also the seed of the three
brains, animal, human, machine. Kubrick is renewing the theme
of the initiatory journey because every journey in the world is an
exploration of the brain^The world-brain is A Clockwork Orange,
or again, a spherical game of chess where the general can
calculate his chances of promotion on the basis of the relation
between soldiers killed and positions captured (Paths of Glory).
But if the calculation fails, if the computer breaks down, it is
because the brain is no more reasonable a system than the world is
a rational one. The identity of world and brain, the automaton,
does not form a whole, but rather a limit, a membrane which puts
an outside and an inside in contact, makes them present to each
other, confronts them or makes them clash. The inside is
psychology, the past, involution, a whole psychology of depths
which excavate the brain. The outside is the cosmology of
galaxies, the future, evolution, a whole supernatural which makes
the world explode. The two forces are forces of death which
embrace, are ultimately exchanged and become ultimately indis­
cernible. The insane violence of Alex in Clockwork Orange is the
force of the outside before passing into the service of an insane
internal order. In Space Odyssey, the robot breaks down from the
inside, before being lobotomized by the astronaut who penetrates
it from the outside. And, in The Shining, how can we decide what
comes from the inside and what comes from the outside, the
extra-sensory perceptions or hallucinatory projections?21 The
world-brain is strictly inseparable from the forces of death which
pierce the membrane in both directions. Unless a reconciliation is
carried out in another dimension, a regeneration of the mem­
brane which would pacify the outside and the inside, and
re-create a world-brain as a whole in the harmony of the spheres.
At the end of Space Odyssey, it is in consequence of a fourth
dimension that the sphere of the foetus and the sphere of the
earth have a chance of entering into a new, incommensurable,
unknown relation, which would convert death into a new life.
    In France, at the same time as the new wave launched a cinema
of bodies which mobilized the whole of thought, Resnais was
creating a cinema of the brain which empowered bodies. We saw
 how states of the world and the brain found their common
expression in the bio-psychic stages of My American Uncle (the
 three brains), or in the historical epochs in Life is a bed of roses (the
 three epochs). Landscapes are mental states, just as mental states

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                  207
are cartographies, both crystallized in each other, geometrized,
mineralized (the torrent in L’amour à mort). The identity of brain
and world is the noosphere of Je t'aime je t’aime, it can be the
diabolic organization of the extermination camps, but also the
cosmo-spiritual structure of the Bibliothèque Nationale.22 In
Resnais this identity already appears less in a whole than at the
level of a polarized membrane which is constantly making relative
outsides and insides communicate or exchange, putting them in
contact with each other, extending them, and referring them to
each other. This is not a whole, but rather like two zones which
communicate all the more, or are all the more in contact, because
they cease to be symmetrical and synchronous, like the halves of
the brain in Stavisky.23 In Providence, the bombshell is in the state
of body of the old, alcoholic novelist, who rattles in every
direction, but also in the state of the cosmos in thunder and
lightning, and in the social state in machine-gun and rifle bursts.
This membrane which makes the outside and the inside present
to each other is called memory. If memory is the explicit theme of
Resnais’work, there is no reason to look for a latent content which
would be more subtle; it is better to evaluate the transformation
that the notion of memory is made to undergo in Resnais (a
transformation as important as that carried out by Proust or
Bergson). For memory is clearly no longer the faculty of having
recollections: it is the membrane which, in the most varied ways
(continuity, but also discontinuity, envelopment, etc.), makes
sheets of past and layers of reality correspond, the first emanating
from an inside which is always already there, the second arriving
from an outside always to come, the two gnawing at the present
which is now only their encounter. These themes have been
analysed earlier; and, if the cinema of bodies referred in
pardcular to one aspect of the direct dme-image —series of time
according to the before and the after, the cinema of the brain
develops the other aspect —the order of time according to the
coexistence of its own relations.
   But, if memory makes relative insides and outsides communi­
cate like interiors and exteriors, an absolute outside and inside
 must confront each other and be co-present. Réné Prédal has
shown the extent to which Auschwitz and Hiroshima remained
 the horizon of all Resnais’ work, how close the hero in Resnais is to
 the ‘Lazarean hero’ which Cayrol made the soul of the new novel,
 in a fundamental relation with the extermination camps.24 The
 character in Resnais’ cinema is Lazarean precisely because he

208                                                      Cinema 2
returns from death, from the land of the dead; he has passed
through death and is born from death, whose sensory-motor
disturbances he retains. Even if he was not personally in
Auschwitz, even if he was not personally in Hiroshima . . . He
passed through a clinical death, he was born from an apparent
death, he returns from the dead, Auschwitz or Hiroshima,
Guernica or the Algerian war. The hero of Je t’aimeje t’aime has
not simply commited suicide; he speaks of Catrine, the woman he
loves, as a marsh, a low tide, night, mud, which means that the
dead are always victims of drowning. This is what a character in
Stavisky says. It should be understood that, beyond all the sheets
of memory, there is this lapping which stirs them, this death from
the inside which forms an absolute, and from which he who has
been able to escape it is reborn. And he who escapes, he who has
been able to be reborn, moves inexorably towards a death from
the outside, which comes to him as the other side of the absolute.
Je t’aimeje t’aime will make the two deaths coincide, the death from
the inside from which he returns, the death from the outside
which comes to him. L'amour amort, which seems to us to be one of
the most ambitious films in the history of cinema, moves from the
clinical death from which the hero comes back to life, to the
definitive death into which he goes down, ‘a shallow stream’
separating the two (it is clear that the Doctor had not been
mistaken the first time, it was not an illusion, there had been
apparent or clinical death, brain-death). Between one death and
the other, the absolute inside and the absolute outside enter into
contact, an inside deeper than all the sheets of past, an outside
more distant than all the layers of external reality. Between the
two, in the in-between, it is as if zombies peopled the brain-world
for a moment: Resnais ‘insists on preserving the ghostly character
of the beings he shows, and on maintaining them in a society of
spectres destined to be included for a moment in our mental
universe; these shivering heroes . . . like to wear warm, out-ofdate clothes’.25 Resnais’ characters do not just return from
Auschwitz or Hiroshima, they are philosophers, thinkers, beings
of thought in another way too. For philosophers are beings who
have passed through a death, who are born from it, and go
towards.another death, perhaps the same one. In a very happy
story, Pauline Harvey says that she understands nothing about
philosophy, but is very fond of philosophers because they give
her a double impression: they themselves believe that they are
dead, that they have passed through death; and they also believe

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                   209
that, although dead, they continue to live, but in a shivering way,
with tiredness and prudence.26 According to Pauline Harvey, this
would be a double mistake, which amuses her. Acording to us, it is
a double truth, although this is cause for amusement as well: the
philosopher is someone who believes he has returned from the
dead, rightly or wrongly, and who returns to the dead in full
consciousness. The philosopher has returned from the dead and
goes back there. This has been the living formulation of philoso­
phy since Plato. When we say that Resnais’ characters are
philosophers, we are certainly not saying that these characters
talk about philosophy, or that Resnais ‘applies’ philosophical
ideas to a cinema, but that he invents a cinema of philosophy, a
cinema of thought, which is totally new in the history of cinema
and totally alive in the history of philosophy, creating, with his
unique collaborators, a rare marriage between philosophy and
cinema. The great post-war philosophers and writers demon­
strated that thought has something to do with Aushchwitz, with
Hiroshima, but this was also demonstrated by the great cinema
authors from Welles to Resnais—this time in the most serious way.
    This is the opposite of a cult of death. Between the two sides of
the absolute, between the two deaths —death from the inside or
past, death from the outside or future —the internal sheets of
memory and the external layers of reality will be mixed up,
extended, short-circuited and form a whole moving life, which is
at once that of the cosmos and of the brain, which sends out
flashes from one pole to the other. Hence zombies sing a song, but
it is that of life. Resnais’ Van Gogh is a masterpiece because it shows
that, between the apparent death from inside, the attack of
madness, and the definitive death from outside as suicide, the
sheets of internal life and the layers of external world plunge,
extend and intersect with increasing speed up to the final black
screen.27 But, between the two, what flashes of lightning there will
have been; these were life itself. From one pole to the other a
creation will be constructed, which is true creation only because it
will be carried out between the two deaths, the apparent and the
real, all the more intense because it illuminates this interstice. The
sheets of past come down and the layers of reality go up, in
mutual embraces which are flashes of life: what Resnais calls
‘feeling’ or ‘love’, as mental function.
    Resnais has always said that what interested him was the
cerebral mechanism, mental functioning, the process of thought,
and that here was the true element of cinema. A cinema which is

210                                                         Cinema 2
cerebral or intellectual, but not abstract, because it is clear to what
extent feeling, affect, or passion are the principal characters of
the brain-world. The question is rather that of knowing what
difference there is between the ‘classical’ intellectual cinema, for
example, Eisenstein’s, and the modern, for example, Resnais’.
For Eisenstein already identified cinema with the process of
thought as this necessarily develops in the brain, as it necessarily
envelops feeling or passion. Intellectual cinema was already the
cerebral whole which brought together pathos and the organic.
Resnais’ pronouncements may be close to those of Eisenstein: the
cerebral process as object and motor of cinema.2B Nevertheless,
something has changed,which undoubtedly has something to do
with scientific knowledge of the brain, but still more with our
personal relationship with the brain. So that intellectual cinema
has changed, not because it has become more concrete (it-was so
from the outset), but because there has been a simultaneous
change in our conception of the brain and our relationship with
the brain. The ‘classical’ conception developed along two axes; on
the one hand integration and differentiation, on the other associ­
ation, through contiguity or similarity. The first axis is the law of
the concept: it constitutes movement as continually integrating
itself into a whole whose change it expresses, and as continually
differentiating itself in accordance with the objects between
which it is established. This integration-differentiation thus
defines movement as movement of the concept. The second axis
is the law of the image: similarity and contiguity determine the
way in which we pass from one image to another. The two axes cut
across each other, according to a principle of attraction, in order
to achieve the identity of image and concept: indeed, the concept
as whole does not become differentiated without externalizing
itself in a sequence of associated images, and the images do not
associate without being internalized in a concept as the whole
which integrates them. Hence the ideal of knowledge as harmoni­
ous totality, which sustains this classical representation. Even the
fundamentally open character of the whole does not compromise
this model, on the contrary, because the out-of-field shows an
associability which extends and goes beyond the given images, but
also expresses the changing whole which integrates the extend­
able sequences of images (the two aspects of the out-of-field). We
 have seen how Eisenstein, like a cinematographic Hegel, pre­
sented the grand synthesis of this conception: the open spiral,
with its commensurabilities and attractions. Eisenstein himself

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                 211
did not hide the cerebral model which drove the whole synthesis,
and which made cinema the cerebral art par excellence, the internal
monologue of the brain-world; ‘The form of montage is a
restoration of the laws of the process of thought, which in turn
restores moving reality in process of unrolling.’ For the brain was
both the vertical organization of intergration-differentiation, and
the horizontal organization of association. O ur relationship with
the brain has followed these axes for a long time. O f course,
Bergson (who was, with Schopenhauer, one of the rare philoso­
phers to propose a new conception of the brain) introduced a
profound element of transformation: the brain was now only an
interval [écart], a void, nothing but a void, between a stimulation
and a response. But, whatever the importance of the discovery,
this interval [écart] remained subject to an integrating whole
which was embodied in it, and to associations which traversed it.2"
In yet another area, it could be said that linguistics maintained the
classic cerebral model, both from the point of view of metaphor
and metonymy (similarity-contiguity) and from the point of view
of the syntagm and paradigm (integration-differentiation).30
   Scientific knowledge of the brain has evolved, and carried out a
general rearrangement. The situation is so complicated that we
should not speak of a break, but rather of new orientations which
only produce an effect of a break with the classical image at the
limit. But perhaps our own relationship with the brain changed at
the same time, and, on its own account, independently of science,
and consummated the break with the old relationship. On the one
hand, the organic process of integration and differentiation
increasingly pointed to relative levels of interiority and exterio­
rity and, through them, to an absolute outside and inside, in
contact topologically: this was the discovery of a topological
cerebral space, which passed through relative mediums [milieux]
to achieve the co-presence of an inside deeper than any internal
medium, and an outside more distant than any external
medium.31 On the other hand, the process of association increas­
ingly came up against cuts in the continuous network of the brain;
everywhere there were micro-fissures which were not simply
voids to be crossed, but random mechanisms introducing them­
selves at each moment between the sending and receiving of an
association message: this was the discovery of a probabilistic or
semi-fortuitous cerebral space, ‘an uncertain system’.32 It is
perhaps through these two aspects that the brain can be defined
as an acentred system.33 It is obviously not through the influence

212                                                        Cinema 2
of science that our relationship with the brain changed : perhaps it
was the opposite, our relationship with the brain having changed
first, obscurely guiding science. Pyschology has a good deal to say
about a lived relationship with the brain, of a lived body, but it has
less to say about a lived brain. O ur lived relationship with the
brain becomes increasingly fragile, less and less ‘Euclidean’ and
goes through little cerebral deaths. The brain becomes our
problem or our illness, our passion, rather than our mastery, our
solution or decision. We are not copying Artaud, but Artaud lived
and said something about the brain that concerns all of us: that ‘its
antennae turned towards the invisible’, that it has a capacity to
‘resume a resurrection from death’.
   We no longer believe in a whole as interiority of thought —even
an open one; we believe in a force from the outside which hollows
itself out, grabs us and attracts the inside. We no longer believe in
an association of images — even crossing voids; we believe in
breaks which take on an absolute value and subordinate all
association. This is not abstracting, these two aspects define the
new ‘intellectual’ cinema and examples can be found in particular
in Téchiné, and Benoit Jacquot. Both are able to take the
sensory-motor collapse on which modern cinema is constituted as
read. But they distinguish themselves from the cinema of bodies
because for them (as for Resnais) it is the brain which initially
orders atdtudes. The brain cuts or puts to (light all internal
associations, it summons an outside beyond any external world.
In Téchiné, associated images slide and flee on windows,
following currents up which the character must go back to move
towards an outside which calls them, but which he will perhaps
not be able to meet up with (the boat in Barocco, and then L’hôtel
des Ameiriques).34 In Jacquot, by contrast, it is a function of
literalness of the image (flattened, redundancies and tautologies)
which will shatter associations, to replace them with an infinity of
interpretation whose only limit is an absolute outside (L ’assassin
musicien. Les enfants du placard).3"' In both cases, this is a cinema
inspired by neo-psychoanalytical themes: give me a slip [lapsus'],
an act that is lacking and I will reconstruct the brain. The new
cerebral images are defined by a topological structure of the
outside and the inside, and a fortuitous character at each stage of
the linkages or mediations.
   The great corresponding novel is Andrei Bely’s Petersburg. This
masterpiece evolves in a noosphere, where a corridor is hollowed
out inside the brain, in order to communicate with a cosmic void.

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                   213
It no longer works by totalization, but by application of the inside
on the outside, of the two sides of a membrane (the bomb of the
inside and of the outside, in the belly and in the house). It no
longer works through linkage of images, but through continual
relinked parcellings (the fiendish appearances of the red
domino). This is the constructivist novel as ‘cerebral game’.38
Resnais seems to us close to Bely because he makes cinema the
cerebral game par excellence', hence the organic-cosmic bomb of
Providence and the fragmentations through transformation of
sheets in Je t’aimeje t'aime. The hero is sent back to a minute of his
past, but this is perpetually relinked in variable sequences,
through succeeding drafts. O r again the ghosdy city, as world and
brain, Boulogne as much as Petersburg. This is a space which is
both topological and probabilisdc. In this respect, we can return
to the great difference between classical cinema and modern
cinema. The so-called classical cinema works above all through
linkage of images, and subordinates cuts to this linkage. On the
mathematical analogy, the cuts which divide up two series of
images are rational, in the sense that they constitute either the
final image of the first series, or the first image of the second. This
is the case of the ‘dissolve’ in its various forms. But even when
there is a pure optical cut, and likewise when there is false
condnuity, the optical cut and the false continuity function as
simple lacunae, that is, as voids which are still motor, which the
linked images must cross. In short, rational cuts always determine
commensurable relations between series of images, and thereby
constitute the whole rhythmic system and harmony of classical
cinema, at the same time as they integrate associated images in an
always open totality. Time here is, therefore, essentially the object
of an indirect representation, according to the commensurable
relations and rational cuts which organize the sequence or linkage
of movement-images. This grandiose conception finds its apogee
in the theory and practice of Eisenstein.37 Now, modern cinema
can communicate with the old, and the distinction between the
two can be very relative. However, it will be defined ideally by a
reversal where the image is unlinked and the cut begins to have an
importance in itself. The cut, or interstice, between two series of
images no longer forms part of either of the two series: it is the
equivalent of an irrational cut, which determines the noncommensurable relations between images. It is thus no longer a
lacuna that the associated images would be assumed to cross; the
images are certainly not abandoned to chance, but there are only

214                                                        Cinema 2
relinkages subject to the cut, instead of cuts subject to the linkage.
As in Je t’aime je t’aime, there is return to the same image, but
caught up in a new series. Ultimately, there are no longer any
rational cuts, but only irrational ones. There is thus no longer
association through metaphor or metonymy, but relinkage on the
literal image; there is no longer linkage of associated images, but
only relinkages of independent images. Instead of one image
after the other, there is one image plus another, and each shot is
deframed in relation to the framing of the following shot.38 We
saw this detail in the case of Godard’s intersticial method, and,
more generally, it is the relinked parcelling that is found in
Bresson, in Resnais, and in Jacquot and Téchiné. It is a whole new
system of rhythm, and a serial or atonal cinema, a new conception
of montage. The cut may now be extended and appear in its own
right, as the black screen, the white screen and their derivatives
and combinations: hence the great blue image of night, where
little feathers or corpuscules flutter at various speeds and in
various arrangements, which keeps reappearing in Resnais’
L’amour á mart. In the first place, the cinematographic image
becomes a direct presentation of time, according to noncommensurable relations and irrational cuts. In the second place,
this time-image puts thought into contact with an unthought, the
unsummonable, the inexplicable, the undecidable, the incom­
mensurable. The outside or the obverse of the images has
replaced the whole, at the same time as the interstice or the cut has
replaced association.
   Even abstract or ‘eidetic’ cinema shows a similar evolution.
According to a rough periodization, the first epoch is that of
geometrical figures, taken at the intersection of two axes, a
vertical axis which concerns the integration and differentiation of
their intelligible elements and a horizontal axis which concerns
their linkages and transformations in a movement-material. A
powerful organic life therefore sustains the figure, from one axis
to the other, and sometimes gives it a linear ‘tension’ similar to
Kandinsky (Eggeling’s Diagonal Symphony), sometimes a punctual
expansion closer to Paul Klee (Richter’s Rhytmus 23). In a second
period, line and point are freed from the figure, at the same time
as life is freed from the axes of organic representation: power has
passed into a non-organic life, which sometimes traces a continu­
ous arabesque directly on to the film from which it will draw
images by point-cuts, and sometimes generates the image by
making the point flicker on and off on the void of a dark film.

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                 215
This is the camera-less cinema of McLaren, which implies a new
relationship with sound, whether in Begone Dull Care or Workshop
Experiment in Animated Sound, or Blinkity Blank. But although these
elements already had an important role, a third epoch appears
when the black or white screen stands for the outside of all the
images, when the flickerings multiply the interstices like ir­
rational cuts (Tony Conrad’s The Flicker), when proceeding by
loops effects relinkages (George Landow’s The Film that Rises to the
Surface of Clarified Butter). The film does not record the filmic
process in this way without projecting a cerebral process. A
flickering brain, which relinks or creates loops —this is cinema.
Lettrism had already gone a long way in this direction, and, after
the geometric epoch and the ‘engraving’ epoch, proclaimed a
cinema of expansion without camera, and also without screen or
film stock. Everything can be used as a screen, the body of a
protagonist or even the bodies of the spectators; everything can
replace the film stock, in a virtual film which now only goes on in
the head, behind the pupils, with sound sources taken as required
from the auditorium. A disturbed brain-death or a new brain
which would be at once the screen, the film stock and the camera,
each time membrane of the outside and the inside?39
   In short, the three cerebral components are the point-cut,
relinkage and the black or white screen. If the cut no longer forms
part of either of the two series of images which it determines,
there are only relinkages on either side. And, if it grows larger, if
it absorbs all the images, then it becomes the screen, as contact
independent of distance, co-presence or application of black and
white, of negative and positive, of place and obverse, of full and
empty, of past and future, of brain and cosmos, of the inside and
the outside. It is these three aspects, topological, of probabilistic
and irrational, which constitute the new image of thought. Each is
easily inferred from the others, and forms with the others a
circulation: the noosphere.

                                 3
Resnais and the Straubs are probably the greatest political
film-makers in the West, in modern cinema. But, oddly, this is not
through the presence of the people. On the contrary, it is because
they know how to show how the people are what is missing, what is

216                                                        Cinema 2
not there. Thus Resnais, in La guerre estfinie, in relation to a Spain
that will not be seen: do the people in the old central committee
stand with the young terrorists or the tired militant? And the
German people in the Straubs’ Unreconciled: has there ever been a
German people, in a country which has bungled its revolutions,
and was constituted under Bismarck and Hitler, to be separated
again? This is the first big difference between classical and
modern cinema. For in classical cinema, the people are there,
even though they are oppressed, tricked, subject, even though
blind or unconscious. Soviet cinema is an example: the people are
already there in Eisenstein, who shows them performing a
qualitative leap in The General Line (Old and New), or who, in Ivan
the Terrible, makes them the advanced edge held in check by the
tsar; and, in Pudovkin, it is on each occasion the progression of a
certain awareness which means that the people already has a
virtual existence in process of being actualized; and in Vertov and
Dovzhenko, in two different ways, there is a unanimity which calls
the different peoples into the same melting-pot from which the
future emerges. But unanimity is also the political character of
American cinema before and during the war: this time, it is not
the twists and turns of class struggle and the confrontation of
ideologies, but the economic crises, the fight against moral
prejudice, profiteers and demagogues, which mark the aware­
ness of a people, at the lowest point of their misfortune as well as
at the peak of their hope (the unanimism of King Vidor, Capra,
or Ford, for the problem runs through the Western as much as
through the social drama, both testifying to the existence of a
people, in hardships as well as in ways of recovering and
rediscovering itself).40 In American and in Soviet cinema, the
people are already there, real before being actual, ideal without
being abstract. Hence the idea that the cinema, as art of the
masses, could be the supreme revolutionary or democratic art,
which makes the masses a true subject. But a great many factors
were to compromise this belief: the rise of Hitler, which gave
cinema as its object not the masses become subject but the masses
subjected; Stalinism, which replaced the unanimism of peoples
with the tyrannical unity of a party; the break-up of the American
people, who could no longer believe themselves to be either the
melting-pot of peoples past or the seed of a people to come (it was
the neo-Western that first demonstrated this break-up). In short,
if there were a modern political cinema, it would be on this basis:
the people no longer exist, or not y et. . .the people are missing.

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                   217
   No doubt this truth also applied to the West, but very few
authors discovered it, because it was hidden by the mechanisms of
power and the systems of majority. On the other hand, it was
absolutely clear in the third world, where oppressed and ex­
ploited nauons remained in a state of perpetual minorities, in a
collective identity crisis. Third world and minorities gave rise to
authors who would be in a posiuon, in relation to their nation and
their personal situation in that nation, to say: the people are what
is missing. Kafka and Klee had been the first to state this
explicitly. The first said that minor literatures, ‘in the small
nations’, ought to supplement a ‘national consciousness which is
often inert and always in process of disintegration1, and fulfil
collective tasks in the absence of a people; the second said that
painting, to bring together all the parts of its ‘great work’, needed
a ‘final force’, the people who were still missing.41 This was all the
more true for cinema as mass-art. Sometimes the third world
film-maker finds himself before an illiterate public, swamped by
American, Egyptian or Indian serials, and karate films, and he
has to go through all this, it is this material that he has to work on,
to extract from it the elements of a people who are still missing
(Lino Brocka). Somedmes the minority film-maker finds himself
in the impasse described by Kafka: the impossibility of not
‘writing’, the impossibility of writing in the dominant language,
the impossibility of writing differently (Pierre Perrrault encoun­
ters this situation in Un pays sans bon sens, the impossibility of not
speaking, the impossibility of speaking other than in English, the
impossibility of speaking English, the impossibility of settling in
France in order to speak French . . .), and it is through this state
of crisis that he has to pass, it is this that has to be resolved. This
acknowledgement of a people who are missing is not a renunci­
ation of political cinema, but on the contrary the new basis on
which it is founded, in the third world and for minorities. Art,
and especially cinematographic art, must take part in this task:
not that of addressing a people, which is presupposed already
there, but of contributing to the invention of a people. The
moment the master, or the colonizer, proclaims ‘There have
never been people here’, the missing people are a becoming, they
invent themselves, in shanty towns and camps, or in ghettos, in
new conditions of struggle to which a neccessarily political art
must contribute.
   There is a second big difference between classical and modern
political cinema, which concerns the relationship between the

218                                                        Cinema 2
political and the private. Kafka suggested that ‘major’ literatures
always maintained a border between the political and the private,
however mobile, whilst, in minor literature, the private affair was
immediately political and ‘entailed a verdict of life or death’. And
it is true that, in the large nations, the family, the couple, the
individual himself go about their own business, even though this
business necessarily expresses social contradictions and prob­
lems, or directly suffers their effects. The private element can
thus become the place of a becoming conscious, in so far as it goes
back to root causes, or reveals the ‘object’ that it expresses. In this
sense, classical cinema constantly maintained this boundary
which marked the correlation of the political and the private, and
which allowed, through the intermediary of an awareness,
passage from one social force to another, from one political
position to another: Pudovkin’s Mother discovers the son’s real
object in fighting, and takes it over; in Ford’s The Grapes of Wrath,
it is the mother who sees clearly up to a certain point, and who is
relieved by the son when conditions change. This is no longer the
case in modern political cinema, where no boundary survives to
provide a minimum distance or evolution: the private affair
merges with the social —or political —immediate. In Güney’s Yol,
the family clans form a network of alliances, a fabric of relation­
ships so close-knit that one character must marry the wife of his
dead brother, and another go far away to look for his guilty wife,
across a desert of snow, to have her punished in the proper place;
and, in The Flock as in Yol, the most progressive hero is
condemned to death in advance. It could be said that this is a
matter of archaic pastoral families. But, in fact, what is important
is that there is no longer a ‘general line’, that is, of evolution from
 the Old to the New, or of revolution which produces a leap from
one to the other. There is rather, as in South American cinema, a
juxtaposition or compénétration of the old and the new which
 ’makes up an absurdity’, which assumes ‘the form of aberration’/ 2
 What replaces the correlation of the political and the private is the
coexistence, to the point of absurdity, of very different social
 stages. It is in this way that, in Glauber Rocha’s work, the myths of
 the people, prophetism and banditism, are the archaic obverse of
 capitalist violence, as if the people were turning and increasing
 against themselves the violence that they suffer from somewhere
 else out of a need for idolization (Black God and White Devil).
 Gaining awareness is disallowed either because it takes place in
 the air, as with the intellectual, or because it is compressed into a

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                      219
 hollow, as with Antonio das Mortes, capable only of grasping the
juxtaposition of two violences and the continuation of one by the
other.
    What, then, is left? The greatest ‘agitprop’ cinema that has ever
 been made: the agitprop is no longer a result of a becoming
conscious, but consists of putting everthing into a trance, the people
 and its masters, and the camera itself, pushing everything into a
 state of aberration, in order to communicate violences as well as to
 make private business pass into the political, and political affairs
 into the private (Earth Entranced). Hence the very specific aspect
 assumed by the critique of myth in Rocha: it is not a matter of
analysing myth in order to discover its archaic meaning or
structure, but of connecting archaic myth to the state of the drives
in an absolutely contemporary society, hunger, th irst, sexuality,
 power, death, worship. In Asia, in Brocka’s work, we can also find
the immediacy of the raw drive and social violence underneath
 the myth, for the former is no more ‘natural’ than the latter is
 ‘cultural’.41 A lived actual which at the same time indicates thé
 impossibility of living can be extracted from myth in other ways,
 but continues to constitute the new object of political cinema:
 putting into a trance, putting into a crisis. In Pierre Perrault, it is a
 matter of a state of crisis and not of trance. It is a matter of
stubborn quests rather than of violent drives. However, the
aberrant quest for French ancestors {Le règne du jour, Un pays sans
bon sens, C’était un Québécois en Bretagne) testifies in its own way,
beneath the myth of origins, to the absence of boundary between
 the private and the political, but also to the impossibility of living
in these conditions, for the colonized person who comes up
against an impasse in every direction.44 It is as if modern political
cinema were no longer constituted on the basis of a possibility of
evolution and revolution, like the classical cinema, but on
impossibilities, in the style of Kafka: the intolerable. Western
authors cannot save themselves from chis impasse, unless they
settle for a cardboard people and paper revolutionaries: it is a
condition which makes Comolli a true political film-maker when
 he takes as his object a double impossibility, that of forming a
group and that of not forming a group, ‘the impossibility of
escaping from the group and the impossibility of being satisfied
with it’ (L’ombre rouge)?7’
    If the people are missing, if there is no longer consciousness,
evolution or revolution, it is the scheme of reversal which itself
becomes impossible. There will no longer be conquest of power

220                                                     Cinema 2
by a proletariat, or by a united or unified people. The best third
world film-makers could believe in this for a time: Rocha’s
Guevarism, Chahine’s Nasserism, black American cinema’s blackpowerism. But this was the perspective from which these authors
were still taking part in the classical conception, so slow, imper­
ceptible and difficult to site clearly. The death-knell for becoming
conscious was precisely the consciousness that there were no
people, but always several peoples, an infinity of peoples, who
remained to be united, or should not be united, in order for the
problem to change. It is in this way that third world cinema is a
cinema of minorities, because the people exist only in the
condition of minority, which is why they are missing. It is in
minorities that private business is immediately political. Acknow­
ledging the failure of fusions or unifications which did not
re-create a tyrannical unity, and did not turn back against the
people, modern political cinema has been created on this
fragmentation, this break-up. This is its third difference. After
the 1970s, black American cinema makes a return to the ghettos,
returns to this side of a consciousness, and, instead of replacing a ■
negadve image of the black with a positive one, multiplies types
and ‘characters’, and each dme creates or re-creates only a small
part of the image which no longer corresponds to a linkage of
actions, but to shattered states of emotions or drives, expressible
in pure images and sounds: the specificity of black cinema is now
defined by a new form, ‘the struggle that must bear on the
medium itself (Charles Burnett, Robert Gardner, Haile Gerima,
Charles Lane).4fi In another style,this is the compositional mode
of Chahine in Arab cinema: Why Alexandria? reveals a plurality of
intertwined lines, primed from the beginning, one of these lines
being the principal one (the story of the boy), the others having to
be pushed until they cut across the principal one; and Memory
leaves no place for the principal line, and pursues the multiple
threads which end in the author’s heart attack, conceived as
internal trial and verdict, in a kind of Why Me?, but where the
arteries of the inside are in immediate contact with the lines of the
outside. In Chahine’s work, the question ‘why’ takes on a properly
cinematographic value, just as much as the question ‘how’ in
Godard. ‘Why?’ is the question of the inside, the question of the I:
for, if the people are missing, if they are breaking up into
minorities, it is I who am first of all a people, the people of my
atoms as Carmelo Bene said, the people of my arteries as Chahine
said (for his part, Gerima says that, if there is a plurality of black

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                  221
’movements’, each film-maker is a movement in himself). ‘But
why?’ is also the question from the outside, the question of the
world, the question of the people who, missing, invent them­
selves, who have a chance to invent themselves by asking the I the
question that it asked them: Alexandria-I, I-Alexandria. Many
third world films invoke memory, implicitly or even in their title,
Perrault’s Pour la suite du monde, Chahine’s Memory, Khleifi’s Fertile
Memory. This is not a psychological memory as faculty for
summoning recollections, or even a collective memory as that of
an existing people. It is, as we have seen, the strange faculty which
puts into immediate contact the outside and the inside, the
people’s business and private business, the people who are
missing and the I who is absent, a membrane, a double becoming.
Kafka spoke of this power taken on by memory in small nations:
‘The memory of a small nation is no shorter than that of a large
one, hence it works on the existing material at a deeper level.’ It
gains in depth and distance what it lacks in extent. It is no longer
psychological nor collective, because each person ‘in a little
country’ inherits only the portion due to him, and has no goal
other than this portion, even if he neither recognizes nor
maintains it. Communication of the world and the I in a
fragmented world and in a fragmented I which are constantly
being exchanged. It is as if the whole memory of the world is set
down on each oppressed people, and the whole memory of the I
comes into play in an organic crisis. The arteries of the people to
which I belong, or the people of my arteries . . .
   But is this I not the I of the third world intellectual, whose
portrait Rocha and Chahine among others have often sketched,
and who has to break with the condition of the colonized, but can
do so only by going over to the colonizer’s side, even if only
aesthetically, through artistic influences? Kafka pointed to
another path, a narrow path between the two dangers: precisely
because ‘great talents’ or superior individualities are rare in
minor literatures, the author is not in a condition to produce
individual utterances which would be like invented stories; but
also, because the people are missing, the author is in a situation of
producing utterances which are already collective, which are like
the seeds of the people to come, and whose political impact is
immediate and inescapable. The author can be marginalized or
separate from his more or less illiterate community as much as
you like; this condition puts him all the more in a position to
express potential forces and, in his very solitude, to be a true

222                                                       Cinema 2
collective agent, a collective leaven, a catalyst. What Kafka
suggests for literature is even more valid for cinema, in as much as
it brings collective conditions together through itself. And this is
in fact the last characteristic of a modern political cinema. The
cinema author finds himself before a people which, from the
point of view of culture, is doubly colonized: colonized by stories
that have come from elsewhere, but also by their own myths
become impersonal entities at the service of the colonizer. The
author must not, then, make himself into the ethnologist of his
people, nor himself invent a fiction which would be one more
private story: for every personal fiction, like every impersonal
myth, is on the side of the ‘masters’. It is in this way that we see
Rocha destroying myths from the inside, and Perrault repudiat­
ing every fiction that an author could create. There remains the
possibility of the author providing himself with ‘intercessors’, that
is, of taking real and not fictional characters, but putting these
very characters in the condition of ‘making up fiction’, of ‘making
legends’, of ‘story-telling’. The author takes a step towards his
characters, but the characters take a step towards the author:
double becoming. Story-telling is not an impersonal myth, but
neither is it a personal fiction: it is a word in act, a speech-act
through which the character continually crosses the boundary
which would separate his private business from politics, and
which itself produces collective utterances.
    Daney observed that African cinema (but this applies to the
whole third world) is not, as the West would like, a cinema which
dances, but a cinema which talks, a cinema of the speech-act. It is
in this way that it avoids fiction and ethnology. In Ceddo, Ousmane
Sembene extracts the story-telling which is the basis of living
speech, which ensures its freedom and circulation,which gives it
the value of collective utterance, thus contrasting it with the
myths of the Islamic colonist.4' Was this not already Rocha’s way
of operating on the myths of Brazil? His internal critique would
 first isolate a lived present beneath the myth, which could be
 intolerable, the unbelievable, the impossibility of living now in
‘this’ society (Black God and White Devil) (Earth Entranced); then he
 had to seize from the unliving a speech-act which could not be
 forced into silence, an act of story-telling which would not be a
 return to myth but a production of collective utterances capable
 of raising misery to a strange positivity, the invention of a people
 (Antonio das Mortes, The Lion Has Seven Heads, Severed Heads).4HThe
 trance, the putting into trances, are a transition, a passage, or a

Cinema, body and brain, thought                                    223
becoming; it is the trance which makes the speech-act possible,
through the ideology of the colonizer, the myths of the colonized
and the discourse of the intellectual. The author puts the parties
in trances in order to contribute to the invention of his people
who, alone, can constitute the whole [ensemble]. The parties are
again not exactly real in Rocha, but reconstructed (and in Sembene they are reconstituted in a story which goes back to the
seventeenth century). It is Perrault, at the other end of America,
who addresses real characters, his 'intercessors’, in order to pre­
vent any fiction, but also to carry out the cridque of myth. Operat­
ing by putting into crisis, Perrault will isolate the story-telling
speech-act, sometimes as the generator of action (the reinvention
of porpoise-fishing in Pour la suite du monde), sometimes taking
itself as object (the search for ancestors in Le règne du jour), some­
times bringing about a creative simulation (the elk-hunt in La bête
lumineuse), but always in such a way that story-telling is itself
memory, and memory is invention of a people. Everything per­
haps culminates in Le pays de la terre sans arbres, which brings all the
ways together, or, by contrast, in Un pays sans bon sens, which mini­
mizes them (for, here, the real character has the most solitude,
and does not even belong to Quebec, but to a tiny French minority
in an English country, and leaps from Winnipeg to Paris the
better to invent his belonging to Quebec, and to produce a col­
lective utterance for it).4HNot the myth of a past people, but the
story-telling of the people to come. The speech-act must create
itself as a foreign language in a dominant language, precisely in
order to express an impossibility of living under domination. It is
the real character who leaves his private condition, at the same
time as the author his abstract condition, to form, between the
two, between several, the utterances of Quebec, about Quebec,
about America, about Britanny and Paris (free indirect dis­
course). In Jean Rouch, in Africa, the trance of the Maîtresfous is
extended in a double becoming, through which the real char­
acters become another by story-telling, but the author, too, him­
self becomes another, by providing himself with real characters.
 It may be objected that Jean Rouch can only with difficulty be con­
sidered a third world author, but no one has done so much to put
the West to flight, to flee himself, to break with a cinema of eth­
nology and say Moi un Noir, at a time when blacks play roles in
American series or those of hip Parisians. The speech-act has
several heads, and, little by little, plants the elements of a people
to come as the free indirect discourse of Africa about itself, about

224                                                    Cinema 2
America or about Paris. As a general rule, third world cinema has
this aim: through trance or crisis, to constitute an assemblage
which brings real parties together, in order to make them
produce collective utterances as the préfiguration of the people
who are missing (and, as Klee says, ’we can do no more’).

9      The components of the image

                                   1
The break between the talkie and the silent picture, and the
resistances which it produced, have often been emphasized. But it
has been shown with as much justification how the silent film
called for the talkie, already implied it: the silent film was not
silent, but only ‘noiseless’, as Mitry says, or only ‘deaf, as Michel
Chion says. What the talkie seemed to lose was the universal
language, and the omnipotence of montage; what it seemed to
gain according to Mitry, was a continuity in the passage from one
place to another, from one moment to another. But another
difference perhaps appears if we compare the components of the
silent image with those of the talking image. The silent image, is
composed from the seen image, and the intertitle which is read
(second function of the eye). The intertitle includes, among other
elements, speech-acts. Being scriptual, those passed into the
indirect style (the intertitle, ‘I’m going to kill you’, is read in the
form ‘He says he’s going to kill him’), took on an abstract
universality and expressed in some sense a law. Whilst the seen
image kept and developed something natural, took on the natural
aspect of things and beings. Analysing M urnau’s Tabu (1931),
Louis Audibert observes that it is not only a film kept silent at the
time of the talkie, but a way of justifying the permanence of the
silent film: for, by virtue of its most profound theme, the visual
image points to an innocent physical nature, to an immediate life
which has no need of language, whilst the intertitle or piece of
writing shows the law, the forbidden, the transmitted order,
which come to shatter this innocence, as in Rousseau.1
   It will be objected that this division is closely linked to the exotic
subject of Tabu. But this is not clear. Silent cinema constantly
showed civilization, the city, the flat, everyday objects, objects of
art or cult, every possible artefact. However, it passes on a kind of
naturalness to them, which is as it were the secret and beauty of
the silent image.2 Even the great film sets as such have their own
 naturalness. Even faces take on the appearance of natural
 phenomena, to adopt Bazin’s observation on The Passion of Joan of
Arc. The visual image shows the structure of a society, its

226                                                         Cinema 2
situation, its places and functions, the attitudes and roles, the
actions and reactions of the individuals, in short the form and the
contents. And, no doubt, it grips speech-acts so tightly that it can
make us see the lamentations of the poor or the cry of the rebels.
It shows the condition of a speech-act, its immediate conse­
quences and even its phonation. But what it reaches in this way is
the nature of a society, the social physics of actions and reactions,
even the physics of speech. Eisenstein said that, in Griffith, the
poor and the rich were so by nature. But Eisenstein himself
preserves the identity of society or of history with nature, with the
important reservation that identity is now dialectical, and passes
through the transformation of the natural being of man, and of
the human being of nature: non-indifferent nature (hence, we
have seen, a different conception of montage).3 In short, in the
silent cinema in general, the visual image is, as it were, natural­
ized, as far as it presents us with the natural being of man in
history or society, whilst the other element, the other plane which
is as distinct from history as from nature, passes into a discourse
that is necessarily ‘written’, that is read, and put into an indirect
style.4 Hence, silent cinema must intertwine the seen image and
the read image to the highest possible degree, whether by
forming real blocs with the intertitle, in the style of Vertov or
Eisenstein, or by making particularly important scriptual
elements pass into the visual (as in the written orders and
messages in Tabu, or, in Keaton’s Our Hospitality, the vengeful
father who sees the framed motto ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself
over his daughter’s head . . .), or at any rate, by developing
graphic research on the written text (for example, the repetition
of the word ‘Brothers’ whose letters grow larger in Battleship
Potemkin).
   What happens with the talking cinema? The speech-act is no
longer connected with the second function of the eye, it is no
longer read but heard. It becomes direct, and recovers the
distinctive features of ‘discourse’ which were altered in the silent
or written film (the distinctive feature of discourse, according to
Benveniste, is the I-You relation between persons). It will be
noticed that cinema does not become audio-visual as a result of
this. In contrast to the intertitle, which was an image other than
the visual image, the talkie, the sound film are heard, but as a new
dimension of the visual image, a new component. It is even for this
reason that they are image.5This is a situation which is completely
different from that in theatre. It is likely, from this point, that the

The components of the image                                         227
talkie modifies the visual image: in so far as it is heard, it makes
visible in itself something that did not freely appear in the silent
film. It is as if the visual image is de-naturalized. In effect, it takes
on an area that might even be called human interactions, which are
distinct from both previous structures and consequent actions or
reactions. O f course, interactions are closely bound up with
structures, actions and reactions. But the latter are conditions or
consequences of the speech-act, whilst the form er are the
correlate of the act, and only show themselves in it, through it, as
the reciprocities of perspective in the I-You relationship, the
interferences corresponding to communication. A sociology of
communication is constituted on this basis: interactions caught at
the point where they do not derive from pre-existing social
structures and are not the same as psychic actions and reactions,
but are the correlate of speech-acts or silence, stripping the social
of its naturalness, forming systems which are far from being in
equilibrium or invent their own equilibrium (socializationdesocialization) —interactions are established in the margins or at
the crossroads, constituting a whole mise-en-scène or dramaturgy
of daily life (uneasinesses, deceptions and conflicts in interaction),
opening up a field of special perception, of specific visibility, and
provoking a ‘hypertrophy of the eye’.6 Interactions make themselves
seen in speech-acts. Interactions do not simply concern the
partners in a speech-act precisely because they are not explained
through individuals, any more than they derive from a structure:
rather it is the speech-act which, through its continuous circu­
lation, propagation and autonomous evolution, will create the
interaction between individuals or groups who are far away,
dispersed, indifferent to each other. As in a song which crosses
places, spaces and people (one of the first examples of this was
Mamoulian’s Love Me Tonight). If it is true that the talking cinema
is an interactionist sociology in action, or rather the other way
round, if it is true that interactionism is a talking cinema, it will
come as no surprise that rum our has been a cinematographically
privileged object: Ford’s The Whole Town’s Talking, Mankiewicz’s
People Will Talk, and already Lang’s M.
   As Noël Burch summarizes it, one of the first sequences in M
appears like this: ‘A man reads out a police poster, in front of
which a crowd has gathered, in a loud voice; the same text is
continued in the form, first, of a radio announcement, then in
that of the reading in a loud voice of a newspaper in the café
which serves as frame .. . and where excited customers end up

228                                                       Cinema 2
coming to blows, the victim accusing his assailant of being a
stainer of reputation. This phrase, by which the scene is
interrupted, goes hand in hand with “What a Slanderer!" shouted
out by a man whose apartm ent the police are going through on
the basis of an anonymous letter; finally, when this man, unjustly
suspected, suggests that the killer could be anybody in the street,
this response introduces the fourth episode in the series:
somebody gets manhandled by the crowd as a result of a tragic
misunderstanding.’7 O f course there is a situation, actions and
reactions; but another, irreducible dimension is mixed with these.
It will be noticed, in the example of Lang as in many others, that
the written (the poster, the newspaper) is there to be rendered by
the voice, taken up by determinate speech-acts which make each
scene go hand in hand with the next. To the extent that, in fact, it
is one and the same indeterminate speech-act (rumour) which
circulates and spreads, making visible the live interactions
between independent characters and separate places. And the
more autonomous the speech-act becomes as it goes beyond
determinate characters, the more the field of visual perception
that it opens up is presented as problematic, positioned on a
problematic point at the limit of tangled lines of interaction: as in
the killer ‘leaning with his back against the wall’ whom we can
barely see (or the doubles in Ford’s film and the forkings in that of
Mankiewicz). Structure and situation continue to condition
interactions, as they did actions and reactions, but they are
regulative and no longer constitute conditions. ‘Interaction
remains structured by such conditions, but stays problematic in the
course of action.’*
   We can see from all this the extent to which talking cinema had
nothing in common with the theatre and that the two could only
be confused at the level of bad films. The question: What
innovations did talking cinema bring to the silent film?, then loses
its ambiguity and may be dealt with briefly. Take a theme like that
of police-gangster collaboration: in Eisenstein’s Strike, this
collaboration which puts the barrel workers at the service of the
management is caught in a play of actions and reactions which
matches the natural dependence of the gangster and derives
from the structure of a capitalist society; in M the collaboration
passes through a speech-act which becomes independent of the
two parties concerned, because a phrase begun by the commis­
sioner will be continued, extended, or transformed by the leader
of the gang, in two different places, and will make visible a

The components of the image                                    229
problematic interaction of parties which are themselves indepen­
dent, as a function of ‘circumstances’ (sociology of situations, of
circumstances). O r take another theme like that of degradation:
in Murnau’s The Last Laugh the degradation of the head porter is
able to pass through a ceremonial and a phonatory (even though
silent) scene in the manager’s office; it can include visual rhymes,
between the revolving-doors at the beginning, the dream of the
doors, and the doors to the lavatories where the man ends up; the
film’s splendour consists of a physics of social degradation, where
an individual goes down through the places and functions in a
structure in the big hotel, which has a ‘natural’ or constitutive
role. In Sternberg’s The Blue Angel, in contrast, the teacher’s
cock-a-doodle-doo is a sound drama, a speech-act, which is this
time emitted only by a single individual but none the less takes on
an autonomy, and makes visible the interaction of two indepen­
dent places, the school which the teacher leaves for the cabaret in
a first cock-a-doodle-doo, shy and becoming intoxicated with
himself, then the cabaret which the teacher leaves to return to die
in the school, after another cock-a-doodle-doo which marks the
climax of the degradation and abjectness that he has suffered.
There is something here that the silent film could not achieve,
even and especially with alternate montage.9 If Sternberg’s film is
a great work of talking cinema, it is because the two separate
places, the school and the club, respectively pass through the
ordeal of silence and sound, and enter all the more into
interaction because the cock-a-doodle-doo goes from the first to
the second, then from the second to the first, in two different
times, in consequence of interactions internal to the teacher
himself.
   The silent cinema carried out a division of the visible image and
the readable speech. But when speech makes itself heard, it is as if
it makes something new visible, and the visible image, de­
naturalized, begins to become readable in turn, as something
visible or visual. The latter, from this point, acquires problematic
values or a certain equivocal quality which it did not have in the
silent cinema. What the speech-act makes visible, interaction, may
always be badly deciphered, read, seen: hence a whole rise in the
lie, in deception, which takes place in the visual image. Jean
Douchet defined Mankiewicz by ‘the cinematographic power of
language’.“1 And certainly no author has made such use of the
speech-act, which nevertheless owes nothing to the theatre. For
the speech-act in Mankiewicz makes visible interactions, but ones

230                                                         Cinema 2
which remain at the time imperceptible to many participants, or
badly seen, and which allow themselves to be deciphered only by
privileged characters gifted with hypertrophy of the eye. So that
these interactions (forkings) which come from speech will return
to speech: second speech or voice-off, which can only make visible
afterwards what initially escaped the view, because it was too
strong, too incredible, or too awful.11It is forking which becomes
the visual correlate of a double speech-act in Mankiewicz, once as
voice-off, once as voice in action.
   It was inevitable that the talkie took what appeared to be the
most superficial social forms as its privileged object: encounters
with the other, other sex, other class, other region, other nation,
other civilization. The less of a pre-existing social structure there
is, the better is revealed, not a silent natural life, but pure forms of
sociability necessarily passing through conversation. And conver­
sation is undoubtedly inseparable from structures, places and
functions, from interests and motives, from actions and reactions
which are external to it. But it also possesses the power of
artificially subordinating all these determinations, of making
them a stake, or rather of making them the variables of an
interaction which corresponds to it. Interests, feeling or love no
longer determine conversation, they themselves depend on the
division of stimulation in conversation, the latter determining
relations of force and structurations which are particular to it.
This is why there is always something mad, schizophrenic, in a
conversation taken for itself (with bar conversations, lovers’
conversations, money conversations, or small talk as its essence).
Psychiatrists have studied the conversation of schizophrenics,
with its mannerisms, its interactional bringing closer and putting
at a distance, but all conversation is schizophrenic, conservation is
a model of schizophrenia, not the other way round. Berthet
rightly says: ‘Seeing conversation as the whole of what comes to be
said, what polycephalic, and almost half-mad, subject is to be
imagined to utter it?’12 It would be wrong to consider conversa­
 tion in terms of partners who are already joined or linked. Even in
 this case, the specificity of conversation lies in its redistributing
 the stakes, and its initiation of interactions between supposedly
 dispersed and independent people who pass through the scene
by chance: so that conversation is a contracted rum our, and
 rum our an expanded conversation, both of which reveal the
 autonomy of communicadon or circuladon. This time, it is not
 conversation which provides the model of interaction; it is

The components of the image                                        231
interaction between separated people, or within one and the same
person, which is the model of conversation. What might be called
sociability, or ‘small talk’,1** in a very general sense, is never
identical with society: it is a matter of the interactions which
coincide with speech-acts, and not actions and reacdons which
pass through them according to a prior structure. This essence of
small talk in conversation, as distinct from society, is what Proust
discovered, but also the sociologist Simmel. It is strange to note
how powerless theatre and even the novel were to grasp conversa­
tion for itself, except in authors contemporary with cinema
(Proust, James), or even directly influenced by it (Wilson in the
theatre, or Dos Passos and Nathalie Sarraute in the novel).14 In
fact, the talking cinema was in absolutely no danger of being
confused with filmed theatre or novel, except at its lowest level.
What cinema invented was the sound conversation which, until
then, had escaped the theatre and novel alike, and the visual or
readable interactions which corresponded to conversation. Per­
haps the lowest level was always in danger of drawing cinema into
a dead-end: filmed dialogue. So that it would take neo-realism
and especially the new wave to rediscover conversation and
interacdon: this was a great reactivation, in a positive, parodic, or
critical mode, in Truffaut, Godard and Chabrol. But conversa­
tion and interaction were none the less, from the beginning of the
talkie, cinema’s triumph, as it made them a special genre, the
properly cinematographic ‘comedy’, the American comedy par
excellence (but also the French comedy, with more ambiguity, in
Pagnol and Guitry).
    Conversation will produce the interactions which tighten or
loosen the bonds between individuals, which oblige them to be
winners or losers, to modify or even reverse their perspective
independently of its contents or objects.'3 For example, is the old
lady going to finance the enterprise, is the young girl going to
seduce the man? It is the stimulation of the play of interactions
which decides economic or amorous contents, not the other way
round. The cinematographic talkie, whose potential is realized
 from the outset by the American comedy, is defined by the way
that speech-acts fill space, in increasingly numerous and delicate
conditions which on each occasion constitute the ‘right form’,
bringing together talking speed and the space shown. Everybody
 talks at once, or the speech of one person fills the space so well that
it reduces the other to vain attempts, stammerings, efforts to
 interrupt. The ordinary madness in the American family, and the

232                                                         Cinema 2
constant intrusion of the stranger or the abnormal — like a
disequilibrium in systems which are themselves far from equili­
brium —will produce the classics of comedy (Capra’s Arsenic and
Old Lace). An actress like Katharine Hepburn reveals her mastery
in the sociability stakes through the speed of her retorts, the way
that she disorients her partner and ties him in a knot, the
indifference to contents, the variety or reversal of perspectives
through which she passes. Cukor, McCarey and Hawks make
conversation, the craziness of conversation, the essence of Ameri­
can comedy, and Hawks was able to give it an unprecedented
speed. Lubitsch conquers a whole area of subconversation (some­
what as Nathalie Sarraute defines it). Capra achieves discourse as
element of comedy, precisely because he shows an interaction
with the public within discourse itself. In Ruggles of Red Gap,
McCarey already contrasted English reserve and conciseness with
free American discourse founded on Lincoln’s declaration. And
it is understandable that discourse as cinematographic object
could make Capra go from comedy to the series ‘Why we fight’, in
so far as the very form of sociability, despite its relations of forces
and the cruelty essential to its stakes, appears in democracy,
defined as ‘artificial world’ where individuals have abandoned the
objective aspects of their situation and the personal aspects of
their activity in order to produce a pure interaction between
themselves. American comedy mobilizes nations (confrontation
of America with England, France, the USSR . ..), but also regions
(the man from Texas), classes and also those outside classes (the
drifter, the tramp, the adventurer, all characters dear to interactionist sociology), so as to make visible interactions, discontents
in interaction, reversals in interaction. And, if objecuve social
contents are blurred in favour of forms of sociability, subjects
survive, in the accents and intonations of country or class, as
subjects of speech-acts, or as variables of the speech-act caught in
its intersubjective whole. Perhaps in a different cinematographic
genre, in certain adventure films, subjects themselves disappear.
In this case the rapid voices become atonal and accentless,
horizontal, looking for the shortest route, voices which are
already blank in the same sense as blank weapons, replicas each of
which could just as well be uttered by someone else, to the point
where conversation reveals its madness all the more because it
now merges with the autonomous whole of what 'comes to be
said’, and where interaction is revealed in a purer form because it
has become oddly neutral: as in the Bogart-Lauren Bacall couple

The components of the image                                      233
in certain Hawks films, like To Have and Have Not or The Big
Sleep.‘6
   The heard speech-act, as component of the visual image, makes
something visible in that image. It is perhaps in this sense that
Comolli’s hypothesis is to be understood: the abandonment of
depth of field, and the taking on of a certain flatness of the image,
would have had as one of their principal causes the talkie, which
constituted a fourth dimension of the visual image, sup­
plementing the third.17 But, as such, the speech-act is not
restricted to making visible; it sometimes itself sees (Michel Chion
has analysed the special case of these ‘seeing voices’, which have
‘an eye in the voice’, like that of Lang’s The Testament of Dr Mabuse,
or that of the computer in Kubrick’s 2001, to which could be
added Mankiewicz’s voices).18 And, more generally, the heard
speech-act is itself in a sense seen. It is not just its source which
may (or may not) be seen. In being heard, it is itself seen, as itself
tracing a path in the visual image. It is true that silent cinema
could already show the space covered by an unheard speech-act
and supplement it: the passing on of a slogan [mot d’ordre] in
Eisenstein, the seductress’s whistle which makes the man jum p in
Murnau’s Sunrise, the call of the look-out which goes through
progressive close-ups in M urnau’s Tabu, the siren and noises of
machines, through beams of light in Lang’s Metropolis. These are
great moments of silent film. But it was the space covered which
allowed the silent speech-act to be reconstituted in this way.
Whilst it is now the heard voice which spreads in visual space, or
fills it, trying to reach its addressee across obstacles and
diversions. It hollows out space. Bogart’s voice at the microphone
is like a guided missile which strives to reach the woman in the
crowd who must get the urgent warning (The Enforcer by Walsh
and Windust), the mother’s song has to go up the stairs and
through the rooms before its refrain finally reaches the
imprisoned child (Hitchcock’s The Man Who Knew Too Much).
 Whale’s The Invisible Man was a masterpiece of the talking cinema
because speech became all the more visible in it. What Philippon
 says about Alaouie’s Beyrouth la rencontre applies to all talking
 cinema worthy of the n p e , in its fundamental difference from
 theatre: ‘Speech is truly seen forcing a difficult path through the
 ruins . .. [The author] has filmed speech as something visible, as a
 material in movement.’19 The reversal which tends to be pro­
 duced in the talkie, in relation to the silent cinema, thus appears:
 instead of a seen image and a read speech, the speech-act becomes

234                                                         Cinema 2
visible at the same time as it makes itself heard, but also the visual
image becomes legible as such, as visual image in which the
speech-act is inserted as a component.

                                  2
We are sometimes reminded that there is notjust one soundtrack,
but at least three groups, words, noises, music. Perhaps an even
greater number of sound components should be distinguished:
noises (which isolate an object and are isolated from each other),
sounds (which indicate relationships and are themselves in
mutual relation), phonations (which cut into these relations,
which can be shouts, but also genuine ‘j argons’, as in the talking
burlesque of Chaplin or Jerry Lewis), words, music. It is clear that
these different elements can enter into a rivalry, fight each other,
supplement each other, overlap, transform each other: this was
the object of thorough research from the outset of talking cinema
by René Clair; it was one of the most important aspects of Tati’s
work, where intrinsic relations of sounds are systematically
deformed, but also where elementary noises become characters
(the ping-pong ball, the car in M r Hulot’s Holiday), and where,
conversely, characters enter into conversation through noises
(the pfff conversation in Playtime)?" All this would be a sign,
following a fundamental thesis of Fano, that there is already a
single sound continuum, whose elements are separate only in
terms of an ultimate referent or signified, but not of a ‘signifier’.21
The voice is not separable from noises, from the sounds which on
occasion make it inaudible: this is indeed the second important
difference between cinematographic and theatrical speech-acts.
Fano cites the example of Mizoguchi’s A Story from Chikmatsu,
‘where Japanese phenomena, sound effects and punctuations by
percussion weave a continuum whose mesh is so fine that it seems
impossible to find its weft’. All of Mizoguchi’s sound work goes in
this direction. With Godard, not only can music hide the voice, as
at the beginning of Week-end, but First Name Carmen uses musical
movements, speech-acts, sounds of doors, sounds of the sea or the
Métro, cries of seagulls, pluckings of strings, revolver-shots,
slidings of bows and machine-gun bursts, the ‘attack’ of music and
the ‘attack’ in the bank, the correspondences between these
elements, and especially their displacements, their cuts, in such a

The components of the image                                       235
way as to form the power of one and the same sound continuum.
Rather than invoking the signifier and the signified, we might say
that the sound components are separate only in the abstraction of
their pure hearing. But, in so far as they are a specific dimension,
a fourth dimension of the visual image (which does not mean that
they merge with a referent or a signified), then they all form
together one single component, a continuum. And so far as they
rival, overlap, cross and cut into each other, they trace a path full
of obstacles in visual space, and they do not make themselves
heard without also being seen, for themselves, independently of
their sources, at the same time as they make the image readable, a
little like a musical score.
   If the continuum (or the sound component) does not have
separable elements, it is none the less differentiated at each
moment into two diverging directions which express its relation
to the visual image. This double relation passes through the
out-of-field, even though the latter is fully part of the cinemato­
graphic visual image. It is true that it is not sound that invents the
out-of-field, but it is sound which dwells in it, and which fills the
visual not-seen with a specific presence. From the outset, the
problem of sound was: how could sound and speech be used so
that they were not simply an unnecessary addition to what was
seen? This problem was not a denial that sound and talking were a
component of the visual image; on the contrary: it was because it
was a specific component that sound did not have to be unneces­
sary in relation to what was seen in the visual. The famous Soviet
manifesto already proposed that sound referred to a source
out-of-field, and would therefore be a visual counterpoint, and
not the double of a seen point: the noise of boots is all the more
interesting when they are not seen.22 We may recall René Clair’s
great successes in this area, like Under the Roofs of Paris, where the
young man and the young girl pursue their conversation, lying in
the dark, all the lights out. Bresson maintains this principle of
non-redundancy, non-coincidence, very firmly: ‘When a sound
can suppress an image, suppress the image or neutralize it.’23This
is the third difference from theatre. In short, sound in all its
forms comes to fill the out-of-field of the visual image, and
realizes itself all the more in this sense as component of that
image: at the level of the voice, it is what is called voice-off, whose
source is not seen.
   In Volume 1 we considered the two aspects of the out-of-field,
the to-the-side and the elsewhere, the relative and the absolute.

236                                                          Cinema 2
Sometimes the out-of-field is linked to a visual space, by right,
which naturally extends the space seen in the image: in this case
the sound-off prefigures what it comes from, something that will
soon be seen, or which could be seen in a subsequent image. For
instance, the noise of a lorry that is not yet visible, or the sounds of
a conversation only one of whose participants is visible. This first
relation is that of a given set with a larger set which extends or
encompasses it, but which is of the same nature. Sometimes, in
contrast, the out-of-field shows a power of a different kind,
exceeding any space or set: it is connected in this case to the
Whole which is expressed in sets, to the change which is expressed
in movement, to the duration which is expressed in space, to the
living concept which is expressed in the image, to the spirit which
is expressed in matter. In this second case, the sound or voice-off
consists rather of music, and of very particular speech-acts which
are reflexive and not now interactive ones (the voice which
evokes, comments, knows, endowed with an omnipotence or a
strong power over the sequence of images). These two relations
of the out-of-field, the actualizable relation with other sets, the
virtual relation with the whole, are inversely proportional; but
both of them are alike stricdy inseparable from the visual image,
and already appear in the silent film (for instance, Dreyer’s The
Passion ofJoan of Arc). When cinema acquires sound, when sound
fills the out-of-field, it therefore does so in consequence of these
two aspects, of their complementarity and inverse proportiona­
lity, even if it is destined to produce new effects. Pascal Bonitzer
and then Michel Chion have called the unity of voice-off into
question, by showing how it was necessarily divided according to
the two relations.24 In effect it seems as if the sound continuum
was constantly differentiated in two directions, one of which
carries noises and interactive speech-acts, the other reflexive
speech-acts and music. Godard once said that two soundtracks
are needed because we have two hands, and cinema is a manual
and tactile art. And it is true that sound has a special relation with
touch, hitting on things, on bodies, as at the beginning of First
Name Carmen. But even for a person with no arms, the sound
continuum would continue to be differentiated in accordance
with the two relations of the visual image, its actualizable relation
with other possible images, realized or not, and its virtual relation
with a totality of images which is unrealizable.
   The differentiation of the aspects in the sound continuum is
not a separation, but a communication, a circulation which

The components of the image                                     237
constantly reconstitutes the continuum. Take, for example, The
Testament of Dr Mabuse according to Michel Chion’s exemplary
analysis: the terrible voice seems to be always to the side, in
accordance with the first aspect of the out-of-field, but, as soon as
there is a move to the side, it is already elsewhere, omnipotent, in
accordance with the second aspect, until it is localized, identified
in the image seen (voice-in). None of these aspects, however,
negates or reduces the others, and each survives in the others:
there is no last word. This is also true of music: in Antonioni’s
Eclipse, the music that first surrounds the lovers in the park is
discovered to come from a pianist whom we do not see, but who is
to the side; the sound-off thus changes its status, passes from one
out-of-field to the other, then goes back in the opposite direction,
when it continues to make itself heard far from the park,
following the lovers in the street.25 But, because the out-of-field
belongs to the visual image, the circuit passes equally through the
sounds-in situated in the seen image (hence all the instances
where the music’s source is seen, as in the dances beloved of the
French school). This is a network of sound communication and
permutation, bearing noises, sounds, reflexive or interactive
speech-acts and music, which enter the visual image, from outside
and from inside, and make it all the more ‘legible’. The prime
example of such a cinematographic network is Mankiewicz, and
especially People Will Talk where all the speech-acts intercommu­
nicate but also both the visual image to which these speech-acts
refer, and the music which harmonizes and goes beyond them,
carrying away the image itself. Hence, we are moving towards a
problem which does not now concern only the intercommuni­
cation of sound elements on the basis of the visual image, but the
intercommunication of the latter: in all its forms of belonging,
with something that goes beyond it, without being able to do
without it, without ever being able to do without it. The circuit is
not only that of sound elements, including musical elements, in
relation to the visual image, but the relation of the visual image
itself with the musical element par excellence which slips every­
where, in, off, noises, sounds, speeches.
   Movement in space expresses a whole which changes, rather as
the migration of birds expresses a seasonal variation. Everywhere
that a movement is established between things and persons, a
variation or a change is established in time, that is, in an open
whole which includes them and into which they plunge. We saw
this earlier: the movement-image is necessarily the expression of

238                                                       Cinema 2
a whole; it forms in this sense an indirect representation of time.
This is the very reason that the movement-image has two
out-of-fields: the one relative, according to which movement
concerning the set of an image is pursued or can be pursued in a
larger set of the same nature; the other absolute, according to
which movement, whatever the set which it is taken as part of,
refers to a changing whole which it expresses. According to the
first dimension, the visual image links up with other images.
According to the other dimension the linked images are internal­
ized in the whole, and the whole is externalized in the images,
itself changing at the same time as the images move and link up.
O f course, the movement-image does not only have extensive
movements (space), but also intensive movements (light) and
affective movements (the soul). Time as open and changing
totality none the less goes beyond all the movements, even the
personal changes of the soul or affective movements, even
though it cannot do without them. It is thus caught in an indirect
representation, because it cannot do without movement-images
which express it, and yet goes beyond all relative movements
forcing us to think an absolute of the movement of bodies, an
infinity of the movement of light, a backgroundless [sansfond] of
the movement of souls: the sublime. From the movement-image
to the living concept, and vice versa . . . Now all this already
applied to silent cinema. If we ask now what cinema music
contributes, the elements of a reply appear. Silent cinema
certainly included a music, improvised or programmed. But this
music found itself subject to a certain obligation to correspond to
the visual image, or to serve descriptive, illustrative and narrative
ends, acting as a form of intertitle. When cinema develops sound
and talking, music is in a sense emancipated, and can take flight.215
But what does this flight and this emancipation consist of?
Eisenstein gave a first response, in his analyses of Prokofiev’s
music for Alexander Nevsky: the image and the music had
themselves to form a whole, revealing an element common to the
visual and the sound, which would be movement or even
vibration. There would be a certain way of reading the visual
image, corresponding to the hearing of the music. But this thesis
does not conceal its intention of assimilating the mixing, or
‘audio-visual montage’, to silent montage of which it would just be
a special case; it fully preserves the idea of correspondence, and
replaces external or illustrative correspondence by an internal
correspondence; it believes that the whole should be formed by

The components of the image                                       239
the visual and sound which go beyond themselves in a higher
unity.2' But, since the silent visual image already expressed a
whole, how can we ensure that the sound and visual whole is not
the same, or, if it is the same, does not give rise to two redundant
expressions? For Eisenstein, it is a matter of forming a whole with
two expressions whose common measure would be discovered
(always commensurability). Whilst the achievement of sound
consisted rather in expressing the whole in two incommensur­
able, non-corresponding ways.
   It is in fact in this direction that the problem of cinema music
finds a Nietzschean solution, rather than Eisenstein’s Hegelian
one. According to Nietzsche, or at least according to the still
Schopenhaurian Nietzsche of The Birth of Tragedy, the visual
image comes from Apollo, who causes it to move according to a
measure, and makes it represent the whole indirectly, mediately,
through the intermediary of lyric poetry or drama. But the whole
is also capable of a direct presentation, of an ‘immediate image’
incommensurable with the first, and this time musical, dionysian:
closer to an inexhaustible Will [Vouloir sans fond] than to a
movement.28 In tragedy, the musical immediate image is like the
core of fire which is surrounded by apollonian visual images, and
cannot do without their procession. In the case of cinema, which
is first of all a visual art, it will be music which will be thought to
add the immediate image to mediate images which represented
the whole indirectly. But the essendal point has not changed,
namely the difference in nature between indirect representation
and direct presentation. According to musicians like - Pierre
Jansen, or, to a lesser degree, Philippe Arthuys, cinema music
must be abstract and autonomous, a true ‘foreign body’ in the
visual image, rather like a speck of dust in the eye, and must
accompany ‘something that is in the film without being shown or
suggested in it’.2H There is certainly a relation, but it is not an
external correspondence nor even an internal one which would lead
us back to an imitation; it is a reaction between the musical foreign
body and the completely different visual images, or rather an
interaction independent of any common structure. Internal
correspondence is no more valid than external, and a barcarole
finds just as good a correlate in the movement of light and water
as in the embrace of a Venetian couple. Hans Eisler demonstrated
this, criticizing Eisenstein: there is no movement common to the
visual and to sound, and music does not act as movement, but as
‘stimulant to movement without being its double’ (that is, as

240                                                       Cinema 2
will).30 For movement-images, visual images in movement,
express a whole that changes, but they express it indirectly, so that
change as property of the whole does not regularly coincide with
any relative movement of persons or things, not even with the
affective movement internal to a character or a group: it is
expressed directly in music, but as contrast or even in conflict, in
disparity with the movement of the visual images. Pudovkin gave
an instructive example: the failure of a proletarian demon­
stration should not be accompanied by melancholic or even
violent music, but constitutes only the drama in interaction with
the music, with the change of the whole as rising will of the
proletariat. Eisler gives many examples of this ‘pathetic distance’
between music and images: an incisive fast music for a passive or
depressing image, the tenderness or serenity of a barcarole as
spirit of place in relation to violent events which are happening, a
hymn to solidarity for images of oppression . . . In short, sound
cinema adds a direct, but musical and only musical, non-corresponding
presentation to the indirect representation of time as changing
whole. This is the living concept, which goes beyond the visual
image, without being able to do without it.
   It will be noticed that direct presentation, as Nietzsche said, is
not identical to what it presents, to the changing whole or time. It
may therefore have a very discontinuous, or rarefied, presence.
Moreover, other sound elements may assume a function anal­
ogous to that of music: hence the voice-off in its absolute
dimension as omnipotent and omniscient voice (Welles’s mo­
dulation of the voice in The Magnificent Ambersons). O r again the
voice-in: if Greta Garbo’s voice stood out in the talkie, it is
because, at a certain point in each of her films, it was capable not
only of expressing the internal, personal change of the heroine as
affective movement, but of bringing together to form a whole the
past, the present and the future, crude intonations, amorous
cooings, cold decisions in the present, reminders from memory,
bursts of imagination (from her first talking film, Anna Christie)}'
Delphine Seyrig perhaps achieves a similar effect in Resnais’
Muriel, gathering together in her voice the changing whole, from
one war to the other, from one Boulogne to the other. As a
general rule, music itself becomes ‘in’32' as soon as its source is
seen in the visual image, but without losing its power. These
permutations are better explained if an apparent contradiction
between the two conceptions that we have discussed, of Fano’s
‘sound continuum’, and of Jansen’s ‘foreign body’, is cleared up.

The components of the image                                       241
It is not enough that they are both opposed to the principle of
correspondence. In fact, all the sound elements, including music,
including silence, form a continuum as something which belongs
to the visual image. Which does not prevent this continuum from
being continually differentiated in accordance with the two
aspects of the out-of-field which also belong to the visual image,
one relative, and the other absolute. It is in so far as it presents or
fills the absolute that music interacts as a foreign body. But the
absolute, or the changing whole, does not merge with its direct
presentation: this is why it continually reconstitutes the sound
continuum, off and in, and relates it to the visual images which
indirectly express it. Now this second movement does not cancel
out the other, and preserves for music its autonomous, special
power.33 At the present juncture, cinema remains a funda­
mentally visual art in relation to which the sound continuum is
differentiated in two directions, two heterogeneous streams, but
is also re-formed and reconstituted. This is the powerful move­
ment by which, already in the silent film, visual images are
internalized in a changing whole, but at the same time as the
changing whole is externalized in visual images. With sound,
speech and music, the circuit of the movement-image achieves a
different figure, different dimensions or components; however,
it maintains the communication between the image and a whole
which has become increasingly rich and complex. It is in this sense
that the talkie perfects the silent film. Silent or talkie, we have
seen, cinema constitutes an immense ‘internal monologue’ which
constantly internalizes and externalizes itself: not a language, but
a visual material which is the utterable of language (its ‘signified
of power’ the linguist Gustave Guillaume would say), and which
refers in one case to indirect utterances (intertitles), in the other
case to direct enunciations (acts of speech and of music).

                                  3
We have already relied on ‘m odern’ authors in relation to some
aspects of our discussion. But it was still not in this that they were
modern. The difference between a so-called classic cinema and a
so-called modern cinema does not coincide with that between the
silent film and the talkie. The modern implies a new use of the
talking, sound and the musical. It is as if, to a first approximation,

242                                                       Cinema 2
the speech-act tended to extricate itself from its dependencies in
relation to the visual image, and assumed a value for itself, an
autonomy which was nevertheless non-theatrical. The silent film
set the speech-act in an indirect style, because it made it read like
an intertitle; the essence of the talkie, in contrast, was to make the
speech-act achieve the direct style, and to make it interact with the
visual image, while still being part of this image, voice-off
included. But it is here that with modern cinema there arises a
very special use of the voice, which might be called the free
indirect style, and which goes beyond the opposition of the direct
and the indirect. It is not a mixture of indirect and direct, but an
original irreducible dimension, in various forms.34 We have
encountered it several times in the previous chapters, whether at
the level of a cinema wrongly called direct, or at the level of a
cinema of composition which it would be wrong to call indirect.
To limit ourselves to this second case, free indirect speech may be
presented as a passage from the indirect to the direct, or the other
way round, although this is hot a mixture. Thus Rohmer has
often said, when explaining his practice, that the ‘Contes moraux’
were mises-en-scene of texts first written in an indirect style, then
changing to the condition of dialogues: the voice-off is ob­
literated, even the narrator enters into a direct relation with
another (for instance the woman writer in Claire’s Knee), but in
such conditions that the direct style keeps the marks of an indirect
origin and does not allow itself to be fixed with the first person.
Outside of the series of ‘Contes’ and that of the ‘Proverbes’, the
two great films, The Marquise of 0 and Perceval le Gallois,
successfully give cinema the power of the free indirect, as it
appears in Kleist’s writings, or in the medieval romance, where
 the characters can speak of themselves in the third person (‘She is
 crying’, sings Blanchefleur).33 It is as if Rohmer has taken the
 opposite path to Bresson, who had already used Dostoevsky twice
 and the medieval romance once. For, in Bresson, it is not indirect
 discourse which is treated as direct, it was the opposite; it was the
 direct, the dialogue, which was treated as if it were reported by
 someone else: hence the famous Bressonian voice, the voice of the
 ‘model’ in opposition to the voice of the theatre actor, where the
 character speaks as if he were listening to his own woj^ds reported
 by someone else, hence achieving a literalness of the voice, cutting
 it off from any direct resonance, and making it produce a free
 indirect speech.36
    If it is true that modern cinema implies the collapse of the

The components of the image                                      243
sensory-motor schema, the speech-act is no longer inserted in the
linkage of actions and reactions, and does not reveal a web of
interactions any more. It turns in on itself; it is no longer a
dependant or something which is part of the visual image; it
becomes a completely separate sound image; it takes on a
cinematographic autonomy and cinema becomes truly audio­
visual. It is this which produces the unity of all the new forms of
speech-act, when it moves into this regime of the free-indirect:
this act through which the talkie finally becomes autonomous.
Thus it is no longer a question of action-reaction, nor of
interaction, nor even of reflection. The speech-act has changed its
status. If we go to ‘direct’ cinema, we fully discover this new status
which gives speech the value of a free indirect one: this is
story-telling. The speech-act becomes act of story-telling, in Rouch
or in Perrault, what Perrault calls ‘the flagrant offence of making
up legends’ [legender], and which takes on the political dimension
of the constitution of a people (it is through this alone that a
cinema presented as direct of lived may be defined). And, in a
cinema of composition as in Bresson or Rohmer, a similar result
would be achieved at other levels and with other means. Accord­
ing to Rohmer, it is the analysis of morals in a society in crisis
which allows speech to be revealed as ‘realizing fabrication’,
creative of the event.37 With Bresson, conversely, it is the event
that speech must get back to from the inside in order to draw
from it the spiritual part of which we are the eternal contem­
porary: that which produces memory or legend, Peguy’s ‘inter­
nal’. Free indirect, the speech-act becomes political act of story­
telling, moral act of tale, supra-historical act of legend.38 On
occasion, Rohmer, like Robbe-Grillet, simply begins with an act of
lying, which the cinema, in contrast to the theatre, is capable of;
but it is clear in both authors that the normal concept of the lie is
left strikingly behind.
   The break in the sensory-motor link does not only affect the
speech-act turning in on itself and hollowing itself out, and in
which the voice now refers only to itself and to other voices. It also
affects the visual image, which now reveals^ the any-spacewhatevers, empty or disconnected spaces characteristic of
modern cinema. It is as if, speech having withdrawn from the
image to become founding act, the image, for its part, raised the
foundations of space, the ‘strata’, those silent powers of before or
after speech, before or after man. The visual, image becomes
archaeological, stratigraphic, tectonic. Not that we are taken back to

244                                                       Cinema 2
prehistory (there is an archaeology of the present), but to the
deserted layers of our time which bury our own phantoms; to the
lacunary layers which we juxtaposed according to variable
orientations and connections. These are the deserts in German
cities. These are the deserts of Pasolini, which make prehistory
the abstract poetic element, the ‘essence’ co-present with our
history, the archaean base which reveals an interminable history
beneath our own. O r the deserts of Antonioni, which ultimately
retain only abstract routes, and conceal the multiple fragments of
a primordial couple. These are Bresson’s fragmentations which
link up or relink fragments of space each of which is closed on its
own account. In Rohmer, it is the female body which suffers
fragmentations, undoubtedly as fetishes, but also as pieces of a
vase or an iridescent piece of pottery that has come out of the sea:
the ‘Contes’ are an archaeological collection of our dme. And the
sea or, above all, space in Perceval are affected by a curve which
imposes itself with almost abstract trajectories. Perrault, in Un
royaume vous attend, shows the slow tractors which from dawn take
away the prefabricated houses to return the landscape to empti­
ness: men had been brought here; today they are withdrawn. Le
pays de la terre sans arbres is a masterpiece where geographic and
archaeological images are juxtaposed, over the trail of the almost
vanished moose which has become abstract. Resnais plunges the
image into ages of the world and variable orders of layers, which
cross characters themselves, and bring together in Vamour amort,
for instance, the botanist and the archaeologist returned from the
dead. But they are again essentially the empty and lacunary
stratigraphic landscapes of Straub, where the camera movements
(when there are any, notably pan shots) trace the abstract curve of
what has happened, and where the earth stands for what is buried
in it: the cave in Othon where the resistance fighters had their
weapons, the marble quarries and the Italian countryside where
civil populations were massacred in Fortini Cani, the cornfield in
Della Nube alia Resistenza fertilized by the blood of the sacrificial
victims (or the shot of the grass and acacias), the French
countryside and the Egyptian countryside in Trop tot trop tard.39
To the question: what is a Straubian shot?, one can reply, as in a
manual of stratigraphy, that it is a section comprising the stippled
[pointillees] lines of vanished features and the complete lines of
those that are still touched. The visual image, in Straub, is the
rock.
   ‘Empty’ and ‘disconnected’ are not the best words. An empty

The components of the image                                        245
space, without characters (or in which the characters themselves
show the void) has a fullness in which there is nothing missing.
Disconnected, unlinked fragments of space are the object of a
specific relinkage over the gap: the absence of match is only the
appearance of a linking-up which can take place in an infinite
number of ways. In this sense, the archaeological, or stratigra­
phie, image is read at the same time as it is seen. Noël Burch put it
very well when he said that, when images cease to be linked
together ‘naturally’, when they relate to a systematic use of false
continuity or a continuity shot at 180°, it is as if the shots are
themselves turning, or ‘turning round’, and grasping them
‘requires a considerable effort of memory and imagination, in
other words, a reading'. This is the case in Straub: according to
Daney, Moses et Aaron, are, as it were, the figures which come to be
inscribed on the two sides of the white or empty image, the right
side and the reverse of a single piece, ‘something that is unified
and then is separated in such a way that its two aspects are made
visible simultaneously’; and iii the ambigious landscapes them­
selves, there is produced a whole ‘coalescence’ of the perceived
with the remembered, the imagined, the known.'*" Not in the
sense that it used to be said: to perceive is to know, is to imagine, is
to recall, but in the sense that reading is a function of the eye, a
perception of perception, a perception which does not grasp
perception without also grasping its reverse, imagination,
memory, or knowledge. In short, what we call reading of the
visual image is the stratigraphie condition, the reversal of the
image, the corresponding act of perception which constantly
converts the empty into full, right side into its reverse. To read is
to relink instead of link; it is to turn, and turn round, instead of to
follow on the right side: a new Analytic of the image. No doubt,
from the beginning of the talkie, the visual image began to
become readable as such. But this was because the talkie, as a part
of something, or dependent, made something seen in this image,
and was itself seen. Eisenstein created the notion of read image, in
a relation to the musical, but here again this was because music
made things visible by imposing an irreversible orientation on the
eye. It is no longer the same now, in this second stage of the talkie.
It is the opposite because the heard speech ceases to make seen
and be seen; it is because it becomes independent of the visual
image, that the visual image attains to the new readability of
things on its own account, and becomes an archaeological or
rather stratigraphie section which must be read: ‘Rock is not

246                                                         Cinema 2
touched in words’, it is said in Della Nube . . . And, in Fortini Card,
Jean-Claude Bonnet analyses the ‘great central fissure’, the
‘telluric, geological, geophysical’ sequence without words, ‘where
the landscape is given to be read as place of inscription of
struggles, empty theatre of operations’.41 A new sense of ‘read­
able’ appears for the visual image, at the same time as the
speech-act becomes for itself an autonomous sound image.
    It has often been observed that modern cinema is in some sense
closer to silent cinema than to the first-stage talkie: not only
because it sometimes reintroduces intertide but also because it
uses, through the other approach of the silent film, injections of
scriptual elements into the visual image (notebooks, letters, and,
repeatedly in Straub, lapidary or petrified inscriptions ‘comme­
morative plaques, monuments to the dead, street-names .. .’).42
Nevertheless there is no basis for bringing together modern and
silent cinema rather than the first stage of the talkie. For, in silent
cinema, we found ourselves faced with two kinds of images, one
seen and the other read (intertide), or before two elements of the
image (scriptual injections). Whilst, now, it is the visual image in
 its entirety that must be read, intertitles and injections being now
only the stipplings [pointillees] of a stratigraphic layer, or the
variable connections from one layer to another, the passages
 from one to the other (hence, for instance, the electronic
 transformations of the scriptual in Godard).43 In short, in
 modern cinema, the readability of the visual image, the ‘duty’ of
 reading the image, no longer relates to a specific element as in the
 silent, nor to an overall effect of the speech-act in the seen image,
 as in the first stage of the talkie. It is because the speech-act has
 gone elsewhere and assumed its autonomy that the visual image
 for its part reveals an archaeology or a stratigraphy, that is, a
 reading which concerns it in its entirety, and concerns it uniquely.
 The aesthetic of the visual image therefore takes on a new
 character: its pictorial or sculptural qualities depend on a
 geological, tectonic power as in Cezanne’s mountains. This is
 what is developed to its highest point in Straub.44 The visual
 image reveals its geological strata or foundations, whilst the act of
 speech and also of music becomes for its part founder, ethereal.
 The huge paradox of Ozu is perhaps explicable in this way: for
 Ozu was, already in silent film, the one who invented empty and
 disconnected spaces, and even still lifes, which revealed the strata
 of the visual image and submitted it as such to a stratigraphic
 reading; in this way he anticipated modern cinema to the extent

The components of the image                                       247
that he had no need of the talkie; and when he came to the talkie,
very late, but again as a forerunner, it was to treat it directly in a
second stage, in a ‘dissociation’ of the two powers which strength­
ens each of them, in a ‘division of labour between presentational
image and representational voice’.45 In modern cinema, the visual
image acquires a new aesthetic: it becomes legible for itself,
assuming a power which did not generally exist in the silent
cinema, whilst the speech-act has gone elsewhere, assuming a
power which did not exist in the first stage of the talkie. The
ethereal speech-act creates the event, but always placed crosswise
over tectonic visual layers: there are two trajectories crossing each
other. It creates the event, but in a space empty of events. What
defines modern cinema is a ‘to-ing and fro-ing between speech
and image’, which has to invent their new relationship (not only
Ozu and Straub, but Rohmer, Resnais and Robbe-Grillet.. .).46
   In the simplest case, this new arrangem ent of the visual and
talking occurs in the same, but consequendy audio-visual, image.
A whole pedagogy is required here, because we have to read the
visual as well as hear the speech-act in a new way. This is why
Serge Daney refers to a ‘Godardian pedagogy’, a ‘Straubian
pedagogy’. And the first manifestation of great pedagogy, in the
simplest and already decisive instance, would be the last works of
Rossellini. It is as if Rossellini was able to reinvent a primary,
absolutely fundamental, school, with its lesson in things and its
lesson in words, its grammar of discourse and its handling of
objects. This pedagogy, which is not the same as a documentary
or investigation, is particularly clear in The Rise of Louis XIV: Louis
XIV gives the tailor a lesson in things by making him add ribbons
and bows to the prototype court-costume which is to keep the
nobility occupied, and elsewhere gives the lesson in a new
grammar, where the king becomes the sole subject of enunci­
ation, whilst things happen according to his designs. Rossellini’s
pedagogy, or rather his ‘didactics’, does not consist in reporting
discourses and showing things, but in revealing the simple
structure of speech, the speech-act, and the everyday manufac­
ture of objects, small or large works, crafts or industry. The
Messiah combines parables as Christ’s speech-act with the manu­
facture of craft objects; Agosti.no di Ippona combines the act of faith
with the new sculpture (similarly the objects in Blaise Pascal, the
market in Socrates . . .). Two trajectories are combined. What
interests Rossellini is to make ‘the struggle’ comprehensible as
emergence of the new: not a struggle between two trajectories,

248                                                        Cinema 2
but a struggle which can only be revealed through the two, thanks
to their to-ing and fro-ing. Underneath discourses there has to be
found the new style of speech-act which is revealed on each
occasion, in a language struggle with the old, and, underneath
things, the new space which is formed, in tectonic opposition to
the old. The space of Louis XIV is Versailles, the laid-out space
which contrasts with the packing together of Mazarin, but also the
industrial space where things will be produced in series. W hether
it is Socrates, Christ, Augustine, Louis XIV, Pascal, or Descartes,
the speech-act is torn away from the old style, at the same time as
space forms a new layer which tends to cover over the old;
everywhere a struggle marking the itinerary of a world which
emerges from one historical moment to enter into another, the
difficult birth of a new world, under the double forceps of words
and things, speech-act and stratified space. It is a conception of
history which simultaneously calls up the comic and the dramatic,
the extraordinary and the everyday: new types of speech-act and
new structurations of space. An ‘archaeological’ conception
almost in Michel Foucault’s sense. It is a method that Godard was
to inherit, and which he would make the basis of his own
pedagogy, his own didacticism: the lessons in things and the
lessons in words in Sixfois deux, up to the famous sequence in Slow
Motion, where the lesson in things bears on the postures that the
client imposes on the whore, and the lesson in words on the
phonemes that she has to come out with, the two being quite
separate.
    The new regime of the image is constructed on this pedagogical
base. This new regime, as we have seen, consists of this: images
and sequences are no longer linked by rational cuts; which end
the first or begin the second, but are relinked on top of irrational
cuts, which no longer belong to either of the two and are valid for
themselves (interstices). Irrational cuts thus have a disjunctive,
and no longer a conjunctive, value.47 In the complex case that we
are now considering, the question is: where do these cuts occur,
and what do they consist of, since they have an autonomy? We
find ourselves before a first sequence of visual images with a
sound and talking component, as in the first stage of the talkie;
but they are moving towards a limit which no longer belongs to
them, any more than it belongs to the second sequence. Now this
limit, this irrational cut, may present itself in quite diverse visual
forms: whether in the steady form of a sequence of unusual,
‘anomalous’ images, which come and interrupt the normal

The components of the image                                          249
 linkage of the two sequences; or in the enlarged form of the black
 screen, or the white screen, and their derivatives. But on each
 occasion, the irrational cut implies the new stage of the talkie, the new
figure of sound. This may be an act of silence, in the sense that it is
 the talkie and the musical which invent silence. It may be a
 speech-act, but in the story-telling or founding aspect which it
 takes on here, in contrast to its ‘classical’ aspects. There are
 numerous instances in the new wave: Truffaut’s Shoot the Piano
 Player, for example, where a strange speech-act comes and
 interrupts the motor pursuit, all the more strange in that it retains
 the appearance of a simple chance conversation; however, the
 procedure takes on its full force with Godard, because the
 irrational cut towards which a normal sequence tends is the genre
 or category personified, which precisely requires the speech-act
 as founder (the intercession of Brice Parain in Vivre sa vie), as
 story-teller (the intercession of Devos in Pierrot lefou). It can also
 be an act of music, in the sense that music would find its natural
 place in the snowy black screen which comes and cuts the
 sequences of images, and will fill this gap, so as to divide the
 images into two constantly revised series: this is the organization
 of Resnais’ L ’amour a mart, where Henze’s music makes itself
 heard only in the gaps, assuming a mobile disjunctive funcdon
 between the two series, from death to life and from life to death.
 Things can be even more complex, when the series of images not
 only tends towards a musical limit, as cut or category (as in
 Godard’s Slow Motion, where the question rings out: what is that
 music?), but when this cut, this limit, itself forms a series which is
 superimposed in the first (as in the vertical construction of First
 Name Carmen, where the images of the quartet develop into a
 series which can be superimposed on the series whose cuts it
 ensures). Godard is definitely one of the authors who has thought
 most about visual-sound relationships. But his tendency to
 reinvest the visual with sound, with the ultimate aim (as Daney
 puts it) o f‘restoring’ both to the body from which they have been
 taken, produces a system of disengagements or micro-cuts in all
 directions: cuts spread and no longer pass between the sound and
 the visual, but in the visual, in the sound, and in their multiplied
 connections.'"1In contrast, what happens when the irrational cut,
 the interstice or interval, pass between visual and sound elements
 which are purified, disjunctive, freed from each other?
    To return to a demonstrative pedagogy, Eustache’s film Les
photos d’Alix reduces the visual to photos, the voice to a

250                                                         Cinema 2
commentary, but between the commentary and the photo a gap is
progressively excavated, without, however, the observer being
surprised at this growing heterogeneity. In Last YearinMarienbad,
and in all his work, Robbe-Grillet put into play a new asynchrony,
where the talking and the visual were no longer held together, no
longer corresponded, but belied and contradicted themselves,
without it being possible to say that one rather than the other is
‘right’: something undecidable between the two (as Gardies
observes, the visual has no special claim to authenticity, and
includes as many implausibilities as speech). And the contra­
dictions no longer allow us simply to confront the heard and the
seen bit by bit, or one by one, pedagogically: their role is to induce
a system of unhookings and intertwinings which in turn
determine the different presents through anticipation or regres­
sion, in a direct time-image, or which organize a series of powers,
capable of regression or progression under the sign of the false.49
The visual and the talking may in each case take over the
distinction between the real and the imaginary, sometimes one,
sometimes the other, or the alternative of the true and the false;
but a sequence of audio-visual images necessarily makes the
distinct indiscernible, and the alternative undecidable. The first
characteristic of this new image is that ‘asynchrony’ is no longer in
any way what was invoked by the Soviet manifesto and Pudovkin
in particular: it is no longer a m atter of making heard words and
sound whose source is in a relative out-of-field, and which thus
relate to the visual image whose givens they simply avoid
doubling. Nor is it a matter of a voice-off which realizes an
absolute out-of-field or relation with the whole, a relation which
itself still belongs to the visual image. Entering into rivalry or
heterogeneity with the visual images, the voice-off no longer has
the power which only exceeded these in so far as it defined itself in
relation to their limits: it has lost the omnipotence which
characterized it in the first stage of the talkie. It has ceased to see
everything; it has become questionable, uncertain, ambiguous, as
in Robbe-Grillet’s The Man Who Lies or Marguerite Duras’s India
Song, because it has broken from its moorings with the visual
images which delegated to it the omnipotence which they lacked.
The voice-off loses its omnipotence but by gaining autonomy.
This is the transformation comprehensively analysed by Michel
Chion, and which led Bonitzer to propose the notion o f‘voice-offoff’.50
   The other novelty (or the development of the first), is perhaps

  The components of the image                                     251
  that there is now no out-of-field whatsoever nor voice-off in any
  sense. In the first place, the talkie and the whole of sound have
  won autonomy: they have escaped from Balazs’s curse (there is no
  sound image . . .); they have ceased to be a component of the
  visual image as in the first stage; they have become a whole image
  apart. The sound image is born, in its very break, from its break
  with the visual imagé. There are no longer even two autonomous
  components of a single audio-visual image, as in Rossellini, but
  two ‘heautonomous’ images, one visual and one sound, with a
  fault, an interstice, an irrational cut between them.31 Marguerite
  Duras says of La femme du Gange: ‘There are two films, the film of
  the image and the film of the voices . . . The two films are there,
  with total autonomy . . . Neither are (the voices) voices-off, in the
  conventional sense of the term: they do not facilitate the
  unrolling of the film: on the contrary, they ham per and disturb it.
  They ought not to be linked with the film of the image.’32 For, in
  the second place, and simultaneously, the second of Balazs’s
  curses is also effaced: he acknowledged the existence of sound
  close-ups, and dissolves, etc., but excluded any possibility of a
  sound framing, because, he said, sound did not have sides.33
  However, visual framing is now defined less by the choice of a
  pre-existing side of the visible object than by the invention of a
  point of view which disconnects the sides, or establishes a void
  between them, in such a way as to extract a pure space, an
  any-space-whatever, from the space given in objects. A sound
  framing will be defined by the invention of a pure act of speech, of
  music, or even of silence, which must be extracted from the
  audible given continuum in noises, sounds, words and pieces of
  music. There is thus no longer an out-of-field, any more than
  there are sounds-off to inhabit it, because the two forms of the
  out-of-field, and the corresponding sound distributions, were still
  part of the visual image. But now the visual image has given up its
  externality; it has cut itself off from the world and conquered its
  reverse side; it has made itself free from what depended on it. In
  the same way, the sound image has shaken off its own depen­
  dency; it has become autonomous, has mastered its own framing.
  The externality of the visual image as uniquely framed (out-of­
  field) has been replaced by the interstice between two framings, the
  visual and the sound, the irrational cut between two images, the
  visual and the sound. This is what in our view defines the second
  stage of the talkie (and undoubtedly this second stage would
, never have arisen without television; it is television which made it

252                                                        Cinema 2
possible; but, because television abandoned most of its own
creative possibilities, and did not even understand them, it
needed cinema to give it a pedagogical lesson; it needed great
cinema authors to show what it could do and what it would be able
to do; if it is true that television kills cinema, cinema on the other
hand is continually revitalizing television, not only because it
feeds it with films, but because the great cinema authors invent
the audio-visual image, which they are quite ready to ‘give back’ to
television if it gives them the opportunity, as we can see in
Rossellini’s last works, in Godard’s interventions, in the consistent
aims of Straub, and equally in Renoir, in Antonioni .. .).
   We find ourselves, then, faced with two problems. According to
the first, if it is true that sound framing consists in freeing a pure
act of speech or music, in the creative conditions of cinema, what
does this act consist of? This is what can be called ‘properly
cinematographic utterance or enunciation’. But, at the same time,
the question clearly goes beyond cinema. Socio-linguistics has
been much concerned with speech-acts and the possibilities of
classifying them. Does not the talking cinema, in its history and
without setting out to do so, offer a classification which could be of
benefit elsewhere and could have a philosophical importance?
Cinema invited us to distinguish interactive speech-acts, mosdy in
the relative sound-in and sound-off; reflexive speech-acts, mostly
in the absolute sound-off; and finally more mysterious speechacts, acts of story-telling, ‘flagrant offences of making up legends’
[flagrants délits de légender], which would be pure in so far as they
would be autonomous and would no longer belong to the visual
image.54 The first problem is thus that of getting to know the
nature of these pure cinematographic acts. And the second
problem would be this: when speech-acts are taken to be pure,
that is, are no longer components or dimensions of the visual
image, the status of the image changes, because the visual and the
sound have become two autonomous components of a single,
truly audio-visual image (Rossellini, for example). But this
movement cannot be stopped: the visual and the sound will give
way to two heautonomous images, an auditory image and an
optical image, continually separated, dissociated, or unhooked by
irrational cuts between them (Robbe-Grillet, Straub, Marguerite
Duras). Nevertheless, the image, having become audio-visual,
does not burst into pieces; on the contrary, it gains a new
consistency which depends on a more complex link between the
visual image and the sound image. So that we do not believe

The components of the image                                       253
Marguerite Duras’s statement about La femme du Gauge: the two
images would be linked only by a ‘material concomitance’, both
written on the same film stock and being seen at the same time. It
is a humorous or provocative pronouncement, which moreover
proclaims what it claims to deny, because it attributes to each of
the two images the power of the other. Otherwise, the work of art
would have no necessity of its own; there would be only a
contingency and a gratuitousness, anything about anything else,
as in the mass of bad arty films, or in the form that Mitry criticizes
Marguerite Duras for. The heautonomy of the two images does
not suppress but reinforces the audio-visual nature of the image,
it strengthens the victory of the audio-visual. The second
problem thus concerns the complex link between the two
heterogeneous, non-corresponding disparate images: this new
intertwining, a specific relinkage.
   The first aspect of the work of Jean-Marie Straub and Daniéle
Huillet is the isolating of the pure speech-act, the properly
cinematographic utterance or the sound image: this act must be
torn from its written support, text, book, letters, or documents.
This tearing-away does not take place in a fit of rage or passion; it
presupposes a certain resistance of the text, and all the more
respect for the text, but on each occasion a special effort to draw
the speech-act out of it. In Chronicle of Anna Magdalena Back, the
supposed voice of Anna Magdalena recites the letters of Bach
himself and the accounts of a son, so that she speaks as Bach wrote
and spoke, thus reaching a kind of free indirect discourse. In
Fortini Cani, the book is seen, the pages are seen, the hands that
turn them, the author Fordni reading the passages which he has
not himself chosen, but it is ten years later, reduced to ‘listening to
himself speak’, overcome with tiredness, the voice passing
through amazement, astonishment, or approval, non­
recognition or the already heard. And certainly Othon shows
neither text nor theatrical representation, but implies them all the
more because the majority of actors have not mastered the
language (Italian, English, Argentinian accents): what they tear
from the representation is a cinematographic act, what they tear
from the text is a rhythm or a tempo; wnat they tear from
language is an ‘aphasia’.33 In Della Nube alia Resistenza, the
speech-act is extracted from myths (‘No, I don't want to . ..’), and
it is perhaps only in the second, modern part that it manages to
overcome the resistance of the text, of the pre-established
language of the gods. There are always conditions of strangeness

254                                                         Cinema 2
which will reveal or, as Marguerite Duras says, ‘frame’ the pure
speech-act.5fi Moses himself is the herald of an invisible God or
pure Word which overcomes the resistance of the old gods and
does not even allow itself to be fixed in its own tablets. And
perhaps what explains the Straubs’ encounter with Kafka is that
Kafka also thought that we had a speech-act only to overcome the
resistance of the dominant texts, the pre-established laws and the
already decided verdicts. But, if this is so, in Moses and Aaron, and
in Amerika, rapports de classes, it is no longer enough to say that the
speech-act must be torn from what is resisting it: it is the
speech-act which is resisdng, it is the act of resistance. The
speech-act is not isolated from what is resisting it without its being
made itself resistant, against what is threatening it. It is itself the
violence which helps ‘in the place where violence reigns’: Bach’s
Hinavs\ Is it not already in this way that the speech-act is act of
music, in the 'sprech-gesang' [spoken song] of Moses, but also the
performance of Bach’s music which is torn from its scores, still
more than the voice of Anna Magdalena is torn from letters and
documents? The act of speech or music is a struggle: it must be
economical and sparse, infinitely patient, in order to impose itself
on what resists it, but extremely violent in order to be itself a
resistance, an act of resistance.’7 Irresistibly, it rises.
    In Unreconciled, the speech-act is that of the old lady, this time
schizophrenic rather than aphasic, which rises to the sound image
of the final revolver-shots: ‘I noticed how time went past; it
seethed, it struggled, paid a million for a sweet then didn’t have
two ha’pennies for a bit of bread.’ It is as if the speech-act is placed
cross-wise over all the visual images it crosses, and which are
themselves organized like so many geological sections, archaeo­
logical layers, in variable order according to the breaks and gaps:
Hindenburg, Hitler, Adenauer, 1910, 1914, 1942, 1945 . . .This
is certainly the comparative status of the sound image and the
visual image in the Straubs: people talk in an empty space, and,
whilst speech rises, the space is sunk into the ground, and does
not let us see it, but makes its archaeological buryings, its
stratigraphic thicknesses readable; it testifies to the work that had
to be done and the victims slaughtered in order to fertilize a field,
the struggles that took place and the corpses thrown out. (Della
Nube. .. Fortini Cani). History is inseparable from the earth
 [terre\, struggle is underground [jowj terre], and, if we want to
grasp an event, we must not show it, we must not pass along the
event, but plunge into it, go through all the geological layers that

The components of the image                                       255
are its internal history (and not simply a more or less distant past).
I do not believe in great resounding events, Nietzsche said. To
grasp an event is to connect it to the silent layers of earth which
make up its true continuity, or which inscribe it in the class
struggle. There is something peasant in history. It is therefore
now the visual image, the stratigraphie landscape, which in turn
resists the speech-act and opposes it with a silent piling-up. Even
letters, books and documents, that which the speech-act has torn
itself from, have passed into the landscape, with the monuments,
the ossuaries, the lapidary inscriptions. The word ‘resistance’ has
a lot of meaning with the Straubs, and it is now the earth, the tree
and the rock which resist the speech-act, resist Moses. Moses is the
speech-act or sound image, but Aaron is the visual image; he
‘makes visible’, and, what he makes visible is the continuity of the
land. Moses is the new nomad, the one who wants no other earth
than the always wandering word of God, but Aaron wants a
territory, and ‘reads’ it already as the aim of movement. Between
the two, the desert, but equally the people, who ‘are still missing’
and yet already there. Aaron resists Moses, the people resist
Moses. What will the people choose, the visual image or the sound
image, the speech-act or the earth?38 Moses drives Aaron into the
ground, but Moses without Aaron has no connection with the
people, with the earth. Moses and Aaron might be said to be the
two parts of the Idea; these parts, however, will never form a
whole again, but a disjunction of resistance, which should prevent
speech being despotic and the earth belonging, being possessed,
subjected to its final layer. It is like in Cézanne, the Straubs’
mentor: on the one hand the ‘stubborn geometry’ of the visual
image (drawing) which goes deep and makes the ‘geological
strata’ readable, on the other hand this thick cloud, this ‘aerial
logic’ (colour and light, Cézanne said), but equally speech-act
which rises from the land towards the sun.D9The two trajectories:
‘The voice comes from the other side of the image.’ One resists
the other, but it is in this always re-created disjunction that the
history under the ground takes on an emotional aesthetic value,
and that the speech-act towards the sun assumes an intense
political value. The speech-acts of the nomad (Moses), of the
bastard (Della Nube . . .), of the exile (Amerika . . .), are political
acts, and it is in this way that they were from the outset acts of
 resistance. If the Straubs give a film taken from Kafka the tide
Avierika, rapports de classes, it is because, from the outset, the hero
 takes on the defence of the underground man, the driver from

256                                                        Cinema 2
below, then has to confront the machinations of the class above
who separate him from his uncle (the delivery of the letter): the
speech-act, the sound image, is act of resistance as much in the
case of Bach, who over-turned the division between sacred and
profane, as in that of Moses, who transformed that of the priests
and the people. But, conversely, the visual image, the telluric
landscape, develops a whole aesthetic power which reveals the
layers of history and political struggles on which it is built. In
Toute révolution est un coup de dés, some people recite Mallarmé’s
poem on the hill of the cemetery where the bodies of the
communards are buried: they share out the poem’s elements
according to their typographical characters, like so many disinter­
red objects. It must be simultaneously maintained that speech
creates the event, makes it rise up, and that the silent event is
covered over by the earth. The event is always resistance, between
what the speech-act seizes and what the earth buries. It is a cycle of
sky and earth, of external light and underground fire, and even
more of the sound and the visual, which never re-forms into a
whole, but each dme consdtutes the disjunction of the two images,
at the same time as their new type of relation, a relation of very
precise incommensurability, not an absence of relation.
   What constitutes the audio-visual image is a disjunction, a
dissociation of the visual and the sound, each heautonomous, but
at the same time an incommensurable or ‘irrational’ relation
which connects them to each other, without forming a whole,
without offering the least whole. It is a resistance stemming from
the collapse of the sensory-motor schema, and which separates
the visual image and the sound image, but puts them all the more
into a non-totalizable relation. Marguerite Duras would go
further and further in this direction: as centre of a trilogy, India
Song establishes an extraordinary metastable equilibrium be­
tween a sound image which makes us hear all the voices (in and
off, relative and absolute, attributable and non-attributable, all
competing and plotting, being unaware of and forgetting each
other, without any one having omnipotence or the last word), and
a visual image which makes us read a silent stratigraphy (char­
acters who keep their mouths closed even when they are speaking
from the other side, so that what they say is already in the perfect
tense while place and event, the dance at the embassy, are the
dead layer that covers up an old burning stratum, the other dance
in another place).61’ In the visual image there is revealed the life
beneath the ashes or behind the mirrors, just as in the sound

The components of the image                                      257
image a pure but polyvocal speech-act is extracted which splits off
from theatre, and tears itself from writing. The ‘untimely’ voices
are like four sides of an entity of sound, which confronts the
visual entity: the visual and the sound are perspectives in a lovestory, to infinity, the same one and yet different. Before India
Song, La femme du Gange had already founded the heautonomy of
the sound image on the two timeless voices, and defined the end
of the film when the sound and the visual ‘touch’ at the point at
infinity whose perspectives they are, losing their respective sides.fil And, after, Son nom de Venise dans Calcutta désert would under­
line the heautonomy of a visual image brought to ruins, revealing
a still more ancient stratum as a young girl’s name underneath the
married woman’s name, but always tending towards an end,
when she touches the common point of the two images, to infinity
(it is as if the visual and the sound ended in the tactile, in ‘j unc­
tion’). Le camion can restore a body to voices, at the back, but
inasmuch as the visible becomes disembodied or empties itself
(the cab, the journey, the appearances of the ghost-lorry): ‘There
are only places of a story left and of story the one which does not
take place.’62*
    Marguerite Duras’s first films were marked by all the powers of
the house, or of house and grounds together, fear and desire,
talking and being quiet, going out and coming back, creating the
event and burying it, etc. Marguerite Duras was a great film­
maker of the house, such an important theme in cinema, not
simply because women ‘inhabit’ houses, in every sense, but be­
cause passions ‘inhabit’ women: as in Destroy She Said, and especi­
ally Nathalie Granger and, later still, Vera Baxter. But why does she
see Vera Baxter as a regression of her work, and equally Nathalie
Granger as a preparation for the trilogy which was to follow? It is
not the first time that an artist can think that what has been fully
achieved is only a step, forwards or backwards, in relation to a
deeper aim. In the case of Marguerite Duras, the house ceases to
satisfy her because she can bring about only autonomy of the
visual and sound components for one and the same audio-visual
image (the house is still a place, a locus, in the double sense of
speech and space). But going further, achieving the heautonomy
of a sound image and a visual image, making the two images the
perspectives of a common point situated at infinity, this new
conception of the irrational cut cannot take place in the house,
nor even with it. The house-grounds undoubtedly already had
most of the properties of an any-space-whatever, the voids and

258                                                        Cinema 2
the disconnections. But the house had to be left, abolished, so that
the any-space-whatever could only be constructed in flight, at the
same time as the speech-act had to ‘get out and away’. It is only in
flight that characters had to be brought together, to reply to each
other. The uninhabitable had to be restored, space made
uninhabitable (beach-sea instead of house-grounds), so that it
achieved a heautonomy, comparable with that of the speech-act,
which for its part had become unattributable: a story [histoire] that
no longer has a place (sound image) for places that no longer have
a history [histoire] (visual image).63And it would be this new design
of the irrational cut, this new way of conceiving of it, which would
constitute the audio-visual relation.
   In the disjunction between the sound image become pure
speech-act, and the visual image become readable or stratigraphic, what distinguishes the work of Marguerite Duras from that
of the Straubs? A first difference would be that, for Duras, the
speech-act to be reached is total love or absolute desire. It is this
which can be silence, or song, or shout like the shout of the
vice-consul in India Song.M It is this which has control over
memory and forgetting, over suffering and hope. And it is above
all this which is creative story-telling coextensive with the whole of
the text from which it tears itself, constituting an infinite writing
deeper than writing, an unlimited reading deeper than reading.
The second difference consists of a liquid quality which increas­
ingly marks the visual image in Marguerite Duras: it is the tropical
Indian humidity which rises from the river, but which spreads out
on the beach and in the sea as well; it is the dampness of
Normandy which already drew Le camion from the Beauce to the
sea; and the disused room in Agatha is not so much a house as a
slow phantom ship moving on to the beach, while the speech-act
unfolds (L ’homme atlantique would come out of this as a natural
consequence). That Marguerite Duras creates seascapes in this
way has important consequences: not only because she is related
to what is most important in the French school, daylight grey, the
specific movement of the light, the alternation of solar and lunar
light, the sun setting in water, liquid perception. But also because
the visual image, in contrast to the Straubs, tends to go beyond its
stratigraphic or ‘archaeological’ values towards a peaceful power
of river and sea which stands for the eternal, which mixes up
strata and carries away statues. We are not restored to the earth
but to the sea. Things are erased by the tide rather than being
buried in dry earth. The beginning of Aurélia Steiner seems

The components of the image                                         259
comparable with that of Della Nube . ..: it is a matter of tearing the
speech-act from myth, the act of story-telling from fable; but the
statues give way to the tracking shot from the front of a car, then
to the river-barge, then to the fixed shots of waves.6’ In short, the
specific readability of the visual image becomes oceanographic
rather than telluric and stratigraphic. Agatha et les lectures illimitées
refers reading to this marine perception that is deeper than that
of things, at the same time as it refers writing to this speech-act
deeper than a text. Cinematographically, Marguerite Duras can
be compared to a great painter who might say: if only I could
manage to capture a wave, just a wave, or a bit of wet sand . ..
There would be yet a third difference, undoubtedly connected
with the two previous ones. In the Straubs, the class struggle is the
relation which keeps circulating between the two incommensura­
ble images, the visual and the sound, the sound image which does
not tear the speech-act from the speech of the gods or bosses
without the intercession of someone who could be described as a
‘traitor to his own class’ (Fortini’s position, but it might also be said
of Bach, Mallarmé and Kafka), and the visual image which does
not take on its stradgraphic values without the earth being
nourished by the struggles of workers and particularly peasants,
all the great resistances.66 This is why the Straubs could present
their work as profoundly Marxist, even taking into account the
cases of the bastard or the exile (including the very pure
class-relations which drive Amerika). But, in her estrangement
from Marxism, Marguerite Duras does not limit herself to
characters who would be traitors to their own class; she calls up
those outside classes, the beggar woman and the lepers, the
vice-consul and the child, commercial travellers and cats, to make
up a ‘class of violence’. The function of this class of violence, first
introduced in Nathalie Granger, is not to be seen in savage images;
this class fulfils the function of circulating between the two kinds
of image, and making them connect, the absolute act of speechdesire in the sound image, the unlimited power of river-ocean in
the visual image: the beggar woman of the Ganges at the
crossing-point of the river and the song.67
   In the second stage, then, talking and sound cease to be
components of the visual image: the visual and the sound become
two autonomous components of an audio-visual image, or, better,
two heautonomous images. In this case we can say with Blanchot:
‘Talking is not seeing.’ It seems here that talking ceases to see, to
make visible and also to be seen. But a preliminary observation is

260                                                            Cinema 2
required: talking breaks with its visual links in this way only by
giving up its particular habitual or empirical exercise; by manag­
ing to turn towards a limit which is at once, as it were, the
unspeakable and yet what can only be spoken (‘different speech,
which carries here and there, and itself differs from speak­
ing . . If the limit is the pure speech-act, this can equally take
the shape of a cry, of musical or non-musical sounds, the whole of
the series being made up of independent elements each of which,
here and there, can in turn constitute a limit in relation to the
possibilities of cutting, of reversal, of retrogression, of antici­
pation. The sound continuum thus ceases to be differentiated
according to what the visual image belongs to or the dimensions
of the out-of-field, and music no longer ensures a direct present­
ation of an assumed whole. This continuum now takes on the
value of innovation claimed by Maurice Fano in Robbe-Grillet's
films (notably in The Man Who Lies: it ensures the heautonomy of
the sound images, and must achieve both the speech-act as limit —
which does not necessarily consist of a speech in the strict sense —
and the musical organization of the series, which does not
necessarily consist of musical elements (similarly, with Mar­
guerite Duras, music will be collated with the organization of the
voices and with the absolute act of desire, vice-consul’s shout or
burnt voice in La femme du Gauge, or, with Straub, the organiz­
ation of Anna Magdalena’s words with the performance of the
music and Bach’s shout. But it would be wrong to conclude that
there is a prevalence of sound in modern cinema. The same
observation is also valid for the visual image: seeing wins a
heautonomy only if it is torn from its empirical exercise and is
carried to a limit which is at once invisible and yet can only be seen
(a kind of clairvoyance, differing from seeing, and passing
through any-space-whatevers, empty or disconnected spaces).68
It is the vision of a blind man, of Tiresias, as speech was that of an
aphasic or amnesic. Henceforth, neither of the twofaculties is raised to
higher exercise without reaching the limit which separates itfrom the other,
but connects it to the other through separating it. What speech utters is
also the invisible that sight sees only through clairvoyance; and
what sight sees is the unutterable uttered by speech. Marguerite
Duras could invoke the ‘seeing voices’ and make them so often say
‘I see’, ‘I see without seeing, yes that’s it.’ Philippon’s general idea,
filming speech as something visible, remains valid, but all the
more so in that seeing and speaking in this way take on a new
meaning. When the sound image and the visual image become

The components of the image                                   261
heautonomous, they still constitute no less of an audio-visual
image, all the purer in that the new correspondence is born from
the determinate forms of their non-correspondence: it is the limit
of each which connects it to the other. This is not an arbitrary
construction, but a very rigorous one as in La femme du Gauge,
which has them dying as they touch, but only touching over the
limit which keeps them separate, ‘for that reason uncrossable, yet
always crossed because uncrossable’. The visual image and the
sound image are in a special relationship, a free indirect
relationship. We are in fact no longer in the classical regime
where a whole would internalize images and be externalized in
images, constituting an indirect representation of time, and being
able to receive from music a direct presentation. What has now
become direct is a time-image for itself, with its two dissymetric,
non-totalizable sides, fatal when they touch, that of an outside
more distant than any exterior, and that of an inside deeper than
any interior, here where a musical speech rises and is torn away,
there where the visible is covered over or buried.69

10 Conclusions

                                  1
Cinema is not a universal or primitive language system [langue],
nor a language [langage]. It brings to light an intelligible content
which is like a presupposition, a condition, a necessary correlate
through which language constructs its own ‘objects’ (signifying
units and operations). But this correlate, though inseparable, is
specific: it consists of movements and thought-processes (prelinguistic images), and of points of view on these movements and
processes (pre-signifying signs). It constitutes a whole ‘psychome­
chanics’, the spiritual automaton, the utterable of a language
system which has its own logic. The language system takes
utterances of language, with signifying units and operations from
it, but the utterable itself, its images and signs, are of another
nature. This would be what Hjelmslev calls non-linguistically
formed ‘content’, whilst the language system works through form
and substance. O r rather, it is the first signifiable, anterior to all
significance, which Gustave Guillaume made the condition of
linguistics.1 We can understand from this the ambiguity which
runs through semiotics and semiology: semiology, which is of
linguistic inspiration, tends to close the ‘signifier’ in on itself, and
cut language off from the images and signs which make up its raw
material.2 Semiotics, by contrast, is the discipline which considers
language only in relation to this specific content, images and
signs. O f course, when language takes over the content or the
utterable it makes from them properly linguistic utterances which
are no longer expressed in images and signs. But even the
utterances are in turn reinvested in images and signs, and provide
the utterable afresh. It seemed to us that cinema, precisely
through its automatic or psychomechanical qualities, was the
system of pre-linguistic images and signs, and that it took
 utterances up again in the images and signs proper to this system
 (the read image of the silent cinema, the sound components of the
visual image in the first stage of the talkie, the sound image itself
 in the second stage of the talkie). This is why the break between
 the silent film and the talkie has never seemed fundamental in
 cinema’s evolution. By contrast, what has seemed fundamental to

Conclusions                                                          263
us in this system of images and signs is the distinction between two
kinds of images with their corresponding signs, movementimages and time-images which were only to appear and develop
later. Kinostructures and chronogeneses are the two successive
chapters of a pure semiotics.
    Cinema considered as psychomechanics, or spiritual automa­
ton, is reflected in its own content, its themes, situations and
characters. But the relationship is complicated, because this
reflection gives way to oppositions and inversions as well as to
resolutions or reconciliations. The automaton has always had two
coexistent, complementary senses, even when they were in
conflict. On one hand, the great spiritual automaton indicates the
highest exercise of thought, the way in which thought thinks and
itself thinks itself in the fantastic effort of an autonomy; it is in this
sense that Jean-Louis Schefer can credit cinema with being a giant
in the back of our heads, Cartesian diver, dummy or machine,
mechanical man without birth who brings the world into suspen­
se.3 But, on the other hand, the automaton is also the psychologi­
cal automaton who no longer depends on the outside because he
is autonomous but because he is dispossessed of his own thought,
and obeys an internal impression which develops solely in visions
or rudimentary actions (from the dream er to the somnambulist,
and conversely through the intermediary of hypnosis, sug­
gestion, hallucination, obsession, etc.)/ Hence there is something
specific to cinema which has nothing to do with theatre. If cinema
 is automatism become spiritual art —that is, initially movement-
 image — it confronts automata, not accidentally, but funda­
 mentally. The French school never lost its taste for clockwork
 automata and clock-making characters, but also confronted
 machines with moving parts, like the American or Soviet schools.
The man-machine assemblage varies from case to case, but always
 with the intention of posing the question of the future. And
 machines can take hold so fully on man that it awakens the most
 ancient powers, and the moving machine becomes one with the
 psychological automaton pure and simple, at the service of a
 frightening new order: this is the procession of somnambulists,
 the hallucinators, hypnotizers-hypnotized in expressionism,
 from The Cabinet of Dr Caligari to Testament of Dr Mabuse via
 Metropolis and its robot. German cinema summoned up primitive
 powers, but it was perhaps best placed to announce something
 new which was to change cinema, horribly to ‘realize’ it and thus
 to modify its basic themes.

264                                                        Cinema 2
   What is interesting in Krackauer’s book From Caligari to Hitler is
that it shows how expressionist cinema reflected the rise of the
Hitlerian automaton in the German soul. But it still took an
external viewpoint, whilst Walter Benjamin’s article set itself
inside cinema in order to show how the art of automatic
movement (or, as he ambiguously said, the art of reproduction)
was itself to coincide with the automization of the masses, state
direction, politics become ‘art’: Hitler as film-maker . . . And it is
true that up to the end Nazism thinks of itself in competition with
Hollywood. The revolutionary courtship of the movement-image
and an art of the masses become subject was broken off, giving
way to the masses subjected as psychological automaton, and to
their leader as great spiritual automaton. This is what compels
Syberberg to say that the end-product of the movement-image is
Leni Riefenstahl, and if Hitler is to be put on trial by cinema, it
must be inside cinema, against Hitler the film-maker, in order to
‘defeat him cinematographically, turning his weapons against
him’.1 It is as if Syberberg felt the need to add a second volume to
Krackauer’s book, but this second volume would be a film: not
now from Caligari (or from a film from Germany) to Hider, but
from Hitler to A Film.from Germany, the change taking place inside
cinema, against Hitler, but also against Hollywood, against
represented violence, against pornography, against business . . .
But at what price? A true psychomechanics will not be found
unless it is based on new associations, by reconstituting the gTeat
mental automata whose place was taken by Hitler, by reviving the
psychological automata that he enslaved. The movement-image,
that is, the bond that cinema had introduced between movement
and image from the outset, would have to be abandoned, in order
to set free other powers that it kept subordinate, and which had
not had the time to develop their effects: projection and
back-projection.B There is also a more general problem: for
projection and back-projection are only technical means which
direcdy carry the time-image, which substitute the time-image for
the movement-image. The film set is transformed, but in that
‘space here is born from time’ (Parsifal). Is there a new regime of
images like that of automatism?
   A return to the extrinsic point of view obviously becomes
necessary: the technological and social evolution of automata.
Clockwork automata, but also motor automata, in short, auto­
mata of movement, made way for a new computer and cybernetic
race, automata of computation and thought, automata with

Conclusions                                                       265
controls and feedback. The configuration of power was also
inverted, and, instead of converging on a single, mysterious
leader, inspirer of dreams, commander of actions, power was
diluted in an information network where ‘decision-makers’
managed control, processing and stock across intersections of
insomniacs and seers (as in, for example, the world-conspiracy we
saw in Rivette, or Godard’s Alphaville, the listening and surveil­
lance system in Lumet, but above all, the evolution of Lang’s three
Mabuses, the third Mabuse, the Mabuse of the return to
Germany, after the war).7 And, in frequendy explicit forms, the
new automata were to people cinema, for better and for worse
(the better would be Kubrick’s giant computer in 2001), and
restore to it, particularly through science fiction, the possibility of
huge mises-en-scenes that the impasse in the movement-image had
provisionally ruled out. But new automata did not invade content
without a new automatism bringing about a mutation of form.
The modern configuration of the automaton is the correlate of an
electronic automatism. The electronic image, that is, the tele and
video image, the numerical image coming into being, either had
to transform cinema or to replace it, to mark its death. We do not
claim to be producing an analysis of the new images, which would
be beyond our aims, but only to indicate certain effects whose
relation to the cinematographic image remains to be deter­
mined." The new images no longer have any outside (out-offield), any more than they are internalized in a whole; rather, they
have a right side and a reverse, reversible and non-superimposable, like a power to turn back on themselves. They are the object
of a perpetual reorganization, in which a new image can arise
from any point whatever of the preceding image. The organiz­
ation of space here loses its privileged directions, and first of all
the privilege of the vertical which the position of the screen still
displays, in favour of an omni-directional space which constantly
varies its angles and co-ordinates, to exchange the vertical and the
horizontal. And the screen itself, even if it keeps a vertical
position by convention, no longer seems to refer to the human
posture, like a window or a painting, but rather constitutes a table
of information, an opaque surface on which are inscribed ‘data’,
information replacing nature, and the brain-city, the third eye,
replacing the eyes of nature. Finally, sound achieving an auton­
omy which increasingly lends it the status of image, the two
images, sound and visual, enter into complex relations with
neither subordination nor commensurability, and reach a

266                                                       Cinema 2
common limit in so far as each reaches its own limit. In all these
senses, the new spiritual automatism in turn refers to new
psychological automata.
   But we are all the time circling the question: cerebral creation
or deficiency of the cerebellum? The new automatism is worthless
in itself if it is not put to the service of a powerful, obscure,
condensed will to art, aspiring to deploy itself through involun­
tary movements which none the less do not restrict it. An original
will to art has already been defined by us in the change affecting
the intelligible content of cinema itself: the substitution of the
time-image for the movement-image. So that electronic images
will have to be based on still another will to art, or on as yet
unknown aspects of the time-image. The artist is always in the
situation of saying simultaneously: I claim new methods, and I am
afraid that the new methods may invalidate all will to art, or make
it into a business, a pornography, a Hitlerism . . .H What is
important is that the cinematographic image was already achiev­
ing effects which were not like those of electronics, but which had
autonomous anticipatory functions in the time-image as will to
art. Thus Bresson’s cinema has no need of computing or
cybernetic machines; yet the ‘model’ is a modern psychological
automaton, because it is defined in relation to the speech-act, and
no longer, as before, by motor action (Bresson was constantly
thinking about automatism). Similarly Rohmer’s puppet char­
acters, Robbe-Grillet’s hypnotized ones, and Resnais’ zombies are
defined in terms of speech or information, not of energy or
motivity. In Resnais, there are no more flashbacks, but rather
feedbacks and failed feedbacks, which, however, need no special
machinery (except in the deliberately rudimentary case of Je
t’aimeje t'aime). In Ozu, it is the daring of the continuity shots at
180° that is enough to assemble an image ‘end to end with its
obverse’, and to make ‘the shot turn round’.10 Space muddles its
directions, its orientations, and loses all primacy of the vertical
axis that could determine them, as in Snow’s The Central Region,
using only a single camera and a rotary machine obeying
electronic sounds. And the vertical of the screen now has only a
conventional meaning when it ceases to make us see a world in
movement, when it tends to become an opaque surface which
receives, in order to disorder, and on which characters, objects
and words are inscribed as ‘data’. The readability of the image
makes it as independent of the vertical human position as a
newspaper can be. Bazin’s alternative, either the screen acts as a

Conclusions                                                       267
frame of painting or as a mask (window), was never sufficient; for
there was also the frame-mirror in the style of Ophuls, the
wallpaper frame in the style of Hitchcock. But, when the frame or
the screen functions as instrument panel, printing or computing
table, the image is constantly being cut into another image, being
printed through a visible mesh, sliding over other images in an
‘incessant stream of messages’, and the shot itself is less like an eye
than an overloaded brain endlessly absorbing information: it is
the brain-information, brain-city couple which replaces that of
eye-Nature.“ Godard will move in this direction (A Married
 Woman, Two or Three Things I Know about Her), even before starting
to use video methods. And, in the Straubs, and in Marguerite
Duras, in Syberberg, the sound framing, the disjunction of the
sound image and the visual image, use cinematographic methods,
or simple video methods, instead of calling on new technologies.
The reasons are not simply economic. The fact is that the new
spiritual automatism and the new psychological automata
depend on an aesthetic before depending on technology. It is the
time-image which calls on an original regime of images and signs,
before electronics spoils it or, in contrast, relaunches it. When
Jean-Louis Schefer invokes the great spiritual automaton or the
dummy at the back of our heads as principles of the cinema, he is
 right in defining it today by a brain which has a direct experience
of time, anterior to all motivity of bodies (even if the apparatus
invoked, the mill in Dreyer’s Vampyr, still refers to a clockwork
automaton).
   The Straubs, Marguerite Duras and Syberberg have, with some
justification, often been grouped together in the project of
 forming a whole audio-visual system, whatever the differences
 between these authors.12 In Syberberg we effectively encounter
 the two great characteristics that we have tried to identify in the
 other cases. First, the disjunction of the sound and the visual
 appears clearly in Le cuisinier du roi, between the cook’s flux of
 words and the deserted spaces, castles, shacks, sometimes an
engraving. Similarly, in Hitler the visual space of the chancellery
becomes deserted, while some children in a corner make heard
 the record of one of Hitler’s speeches. This disjunction takes on
 aspects peculiar to Syberberg’s style. Sometimes it is the objective
 dissociation of what is said and what is seen: front-projection and
 the frequent use of slides provide a visual space not only not seen
 by the actor himself, but with which he is associated without ever
 being a part of it, reduced to his words and a few accessories (for

268                                                          Cinema 2
instance, in Hitler the giant furniture, the giant telephone, while
the dwarf servant talks about the master’s underpants). Some­
times it is the subjective dissociation of the voices and the body:
the body is here replaced by a puppet, a jum ping jack facing the
voice of the actor or reciter; or as in Parsifal the playback is
perfecdy synchronized, but with a body which remains foreign to
the voice it gives itself, a living puppet, whether a girl’s body for a
man’s voice or two competing bodies for the same voice.13 In
other words, there is no whole: the regime of the ‘tear’, where the
division into body and voice forms a genesis of the image as
‘non-representable by a single individual’, ‘appearance divided in
itself and in a non-psychological way’.14 The puppet and the
reciter, the body and the voice, constitute neither a whole nor an
individual, but the automaton. This is the psychological automa­
ton, in the sense of a profoundly divided essence of the psyche,
even though it is not at all psychological in the sense that this
division would be interpreted as a state of the non-machine
individual. As in Kleist, or Japanese theatre, the soul is made
from the ‘mechanical movement’ of the puppet, in so far as the
latter appoints itself an ‘internal voice’. But, if the division is thus
valid in itself, it is nevertheless not valid for itself. For, in the
second place, a pure speech-act as creative story-telling or
legend-making must extricate itself from all the spoken informa­
tion (the most striking example is Karl May who must become a
legend through his own lies and their exposure), but also the
visual data must be organized in superimposed layers, endlessly
mixed up, with variable outcrops, retro-acdve relations, heavings,
sinkings, collapses, a rendering into muddle from which the
speech-act will emerge, will rise up on the other side (these are the
three layers of the history of Germany which correspond to the
trilogy, Ludwig, Karl May, Hitler, and in each film the superim­
position of slides like so many layers the last of which is the end of
the world, ‘a frozen and m urdered landscape’). As if it were
necessary for the world to be broken and buried for the
speech-act to rise up. Something similar to what we have seen in
Straub and Duras happens with Syberberg: the visual and the
sound do not reconstitute a whole, but enter into an ‘irrational’
relation according to two dissymetrical trajectories. The audio­
visual image is not a whole, it is ‘a fusion of the tear’.
   But one of Syberberg’s originalities is to stretch out a vast space
of information, like a complex, heterogeneous, anarchic space
where the trivial and the cultural, the public and the private, the

Conclusions                                                       269
 historic and the anecdotal, the imaginary and the real are brought
 close together, and sometimes on the side of speech, discourses,
 commentaries, familiar or ancillary testimonies, sometimes on
 the side of sight, of existing or no longer existing settings,
 engravings, plans and projects, acts of seeing with acts of
 clairvoyance, all of equal importance and forming a network, in
 kinds of reladonship which are never those of causality. The
 modern world is that in which information replaces nature. It is
 what Jean-Pierre Oudart calls the ‘media-effect’ in Syberberg.15
 And it is an essenual aspect of Syberberg’s work, because the
disjunction, the division of the visual and the sound, will be
specifically entrusted with experiencing this complexity of infor­
 mational space. This goes beyond the psychological individual
just as it makes a whole impossible: a non-totalizable complexity,
 ‘non-representable by a single individual’, and which finds its
 representation only in the automaton. Syberberg takes the image
of Hitler as enemy, not Hitler the individual, who does not exist,
 but neither a totality which could produce him according to
 relations of causality. ‘Hitler in us’ not only indicates that we made
 Hitler as much as he made us, or that we all have potential fascist
elements, but that Hitler exists only through pieces of informa­
tion which constitute his image in ourselves."5It could be said that
 the Nazi regime, the war, the concentration camps, were not
 images, and that Syberberg’s position is not without ambiguity.
 But Syberberg’s powerful idea is that no information, whatever it
might be, is sufficient to defeat Hitler.1' All the documents could be
shown, all the testimonies could be heard, but in vain: what makes
 information all-powerful (the newspapers, and then the radio,
and then the television), is its very nullity, its radical inef­
 fectiveness. Information plays on its ineffectiveness in order to
establish its power, its very power is to be ineffective, and thereby
all the more dangerous. This is why it is necessary to go beyond
information in order to defeat Hider or turn the image over.
 Now, going beyond information is achieved on two sides at once,
 towards two questions: what is the source and what is the addressee?
These are also the two questions of the Godardian pedagogy.
 Informatics replies to neither question, because the source of
information is not a piece of information any more than is the
 person informed. If there is no debasement of information, it is
because information itself is a debasement. It is thus necessary to
go beyond all the pieces of spoken information; to extract from
them a pure speech-act, creative story-telling which is as it were

270                                                        Cinema 2
the obverse side of the dominant myths, of current words and
their supporters; an act capable of creating the myth instead of
drawing profit or business from it.,H It is also necessary to go
beyond all the visual layers; to set up a pure informed person
capable of emerging from the debris, of surviving the end of the
world, hence capable of receiving into his visible body the pure act
of speech. In Parsifal the first aspect is taken up in the huge head
of Wagner, which gives the speech-act as song its creative
function, the power of a myth of which Ludwig, Karl May and
Hider are only the derisory, or perverse, putting to use, the
debasement. The other aspect is taken up in Parsifal, who moves
through all the visual spaces, themselves emerged from the great
head, and who leaves the last end of world space divided in two,
when the head itself divides, and the girl Parsifal does not utter,
but receives into her whole being the redemptive voice.19 The
irrational cycle of the visual and the sound is related by Syberberg
to information and its overcoming. Redemption, art beyond
knowledge, is also creation beyond information. Redemption
arrives too late (the point shared by Syberberg and Visconti); it
appears when information has already gained control of
speech-acts, and when Hitler has already captured the German
myth or irrational.2" But the too-late is not only negative; it is the
sign of the time-image in the place where time makes visible the
stratigraphy of space and audible the story-telling of the
speech-act. The life or the afterlife of cinema depends on its
internal struggle with informatics. It is necessary to set up against
the latter the question which goes beyond it, that of its source and
that of its addressee, the head of Wagner as spiritual automaton,
the Parsifal couple as psychic automata.21

                                  2
We can now summarize the constitution of this time-image in
modern cinema, and the new signs that it implies or initiates.
There are many possible transformations, almost imperceptible
passages, and also combinations between the movement-image
and the time-image. It cannot be said that one is more important
than the other, whether more beautiful or more profound. All
that can be said is that the movement-image does not give us a
time-image. Nevertheless, it does give us many things in

Conclusions                                                      271
connection with it. On one hand, the movement-image consti­
tutes time in its empirical form, the course of time: a successive
present in an extrinsic relation of before and after, so that the past
is a form er present, and the future a present to come. Inadequate
reflection would lead us to conclude from this that the cinemato­
graphic image is necessarily in the present. But this ready-made
idea, disastrous for any understanding of cinema, is less the fault
of the movement-image than of an over-hasty reflection. For, on
the other hand, the movement-image gives rise to an image of
time which is distinguished from it by excess or default, over or
under the present as empirical progression: in this case, time is no
longer measured by movement, but is itself the num ber or
measure of movement (metaphysical representation). This
number in turn has two aspects, which we saw in the first volume:
it is the minimum unity of time as interval of movement or the
totality of time as maximum of movement in the universe. The
subtle and the sublime. But, from either aspect, time is distin­
guished in this way from movement only as indirect represen­
tation. Time as progression derives from the movement-image or
from successive shots. But time as unity or as totality depends on
montage which still relates it back to movement or to the
succession of shots. This is why the movement-image is funda­
mentally linked to an indirect representation of time, and does
not give us a direct presentation of it, that is, does not give us a
time-image. The only direct presentation, then, appears in music.
But in modern cinema, by contrast, the time-image is no longer
empirical, nor metaphysical; it is ‘transcendental’ in the sense that
Kant gives this word: time is out of joint and presents itself in the
pure state.22 The time-image does not imply the absence of
movement (even though it often includes its increased scarcity)
but it implies the reversal of the subordination; it is no longer time
which is subordinate to movement; it is movement which subord­
inates itself to time. It is no longer time which derives from
movement, from its norm and its corrected aberrations; it is
movement as false movement, as aberrant movement which now
depends on time. The time-image has become direct, just as time
has discovered new aspects, as movement has become aberrant in
essence and not by accident, as montage has taken on a new sense,
and as a so-called modern cinema has been constituted post-war.
However close its relations with classical cinema, modern cinema
asks the question: what are the new forces at work in the image,
and the new signs invading the screen?

272                                                          Cinema 2
   The first factor is the break of the sensory-motor link. For the
movement-image, as soon as it referred itself back to its interval,
constituted the action-image: the latter, in its widest sense,
comprised received movement (perception, situation), imprint
(affection, the interval itself), and executed movement (action
properly speaking and reaction). The sensory-motor link was
thus the unity of movement and its interval, the specification of
the movement-image or the action-image par excellence. There is
no reason to talk of a narrative cinema which would correspond
to this first moment, for narration results from the sensory-motor
schema, and not the other way round. But precisely what brings
this cinema of action into question after the war is the very
break-up of the sensory-motor schema: the rise of situations to
which one can no longer react, of environments with which there
are now only chance relations, of empty or disconnected anyspace-whatevers replacing qualified extended space. It is here
that situations no longer extend into action or reaction in
accordance with the requirements of the movement-image.
These are pure optical and sound situations, in which the
character does not know how to respond, abandoned spaces in
which he ceases to experience and to act so that he enters into
flight, goes on a trip, comes and goes, vaguely indifferent to what
happens to him, undecided as to what must be done. But he has
gained in an ability to see what he has lost in action or reaction: he
SEES so that the viewer’s problem becomes ‘What is there to see in
the image?’ (and not now ‘What are we going to see in the next
image?’). The situation no longer extends into action through the
intermediary of affections. It is cut off from all its extensions, it is
now important only for itself, having absorbed all its affective
intensities, all its active extensions. This is no longer a sensorymotor situation, but a purely optical and sound situation, where
the seer [voyant] has replaced the agent [actant]: a ‘description’.
We call this type of image opsigns and sonsigns, they appear after
the war, through all the external reasons we can point to (the
calling into question of action, the necessity of seeing and
hearing, the proliferation of empty, disconnected, abandoned
spaces) but also through the internal push of a cinema being
reborn, re-creating its conditions, neo-realism, new wave, new
American cinema. Now, if it is true that the sënsory-motor
situation governed the indirect representation of time as conse­
quence of the movement-image, the purely optical and sound
situation opens onto a direct time-image. The time-image is the

Conclusions                                                       273
correlate of the opsign and the sonsign. It never appeared more
clearly than in the author who anticipated modern cinema, from
before the war and in the conditions of the silent film, Ozu:
opsigns, empty or disconnected spaces, open on to still lifes as the
pure form of time. Instead of ‘motor situation — indirect
representation of time’, we have ‘opsign or sonsign — direct
presentation of time’.
   But what can purely optical and sound images link up with,
since they no longer extend into action? We would like to reply:
with recollection-images or dream-images. Yet, the form er still
come within the framework of the sensory-motor situation,
whose interval they are content to fill, even though lengthening
and distending it; they seize a form er present in the past and thus
respect the empirical progression of time, even though they
introduce local regressions into it (the flashback as psychological
memory). The latter, dream-images, rather affect the whole: they
project the sensory-motor situation to infinity, somedmes by
ensuring the constant metamorphosis of the situation, sometimes
by replacing the action of characters with a movement of world.
But we do not, in this way, leave behind an indirect represen­
tation, even though we come close, in certain exceptional cases, to
doors of time that already belong to modern cinema (for instance,
the flashback as revelation of a time which forks and frees itself in
Mankiewicz, or the movement of world as the coupling of a pure
description and dance in the American musical comedy). How­
ever, in these very cases, the recollection-image or the dreamimage, the mnemosign or the onirosign, are gone beyond: for
these images in themselves are virtual images, which are linked
with the actual optical or sound image (description) but which are
constantly being actualized on their own account, or the former in
the latter to infinity. For the time-image to be born, on the
contrary, the actual image must enter into relation with its own
virtual image as such; from the outset pure description must
divide in two, ‘repeat itself, take itself up again, fork, contradict
itself’. An image which is double-sided, mutual, both actual and
virtual, must be constituted. We are no longer in the sitation of a
relationship between the actual image and other virtual images,
recollections, or dreams, which thus become actual in turn: this is
still a mode of linkage. We are in the situation of an actual image
and its own virtual image, to the extent that there is no longer any
linkage of the real with the imaginary, but indiscemibility of the two,
a perpetual exchange. This is a progress in relation to the opsign:

274                                                        Cinema 2
we saw how the crystal (the hyalosign) ensures the dividing in two
of descripdon, and brings about the exchange in the image which
has become mutual, the exchange of the actual and the virtual, of
the limpid and the opaque, of the seed and the surrounding.23 By
raising themselves to the indiscernibility of the real and the
imaginary, the signs of the crystal go beyond all psychology of the
recollection or dream, and all physics of action. What we see in the
crystal is no longer the empirical progression of time as succession
of presents, nor its indirect representation as interval or as whole;
it is its direct presentation, its constitutive dividing in two into a
present which is passing and a past which is preserved, the strict
contemporaneity of the present with the past that it will be, of the
past with the present that it has been. It is time itself which arises
in the crystal, and which is constantly recommending its dividing
in two without completing it, since the indiscernible exchange is
always renewed and reproduced. The direct time-image or the
transcendental form of time is what we see in the crystal; and
hyalosigns, and crystalline signs, should therefore be called
mirrors or seeds of time.
   Thus we have the chronosigns which mark the various present­
ations of the direct time-image. The first concerns the order of
time: this order is not made up of succession, nor is it the same
thing as the interval or the whole of indirect representation. It is a
matter of the internal relations of time, in a topological or quantic
form. Thus the first chronosign has two figures: sometimes it is
the coexistence of all the sheets of past, with the topological
transformation of these sheets, and the overtaking of psychologi­
cal memory towards a world-memory (this sign can be called
sheet, aspect, or facies). Sometimes it is the simultaneity of points
of present, these points breaking with all external succession, and
carrying out quantic jum ps between the presents which are
doubled by the past, the future and the present itself (this sign can
be called point or accent). We are no longer in an indiscernible
distinction between the real and the imaginary, which would
characterize the crystal image, but in undecidable alternatives
between sheets of past, or ‘inexplicable’ differences between
points of present, which now concern the direct time-image.
What is in play is no longer the real and the imaginary, but the
true and the false. And just as the real and the imaginary become
indiscernible in certain very specific conditions of the image, the
 true and the false now become undecidable or inextricable: the
impossible proceeds from the possible, and the past is not

Conclusions                                                   275
necessarily true. A new logic has to be invented, just as earlier a
new psychology had to be. It seemed to us that Resnais went
furthest in the direction of coexisting sheets of past, and
Robbe-Grillet in that of simultaneous peaks of present: hence the
paradox of Last Year in Marienbad, which participates in the
double system. But, in any event, the time-image has arisen
through direct or transcendental presentation, as a new element
in post-war cinema, and Welles was master of the time-image . ..
   There is still another type of chronosign which on this occasion
constitutes time as series: the before and after are no longer
themselves a matter of external empirical succession, but of the
intrinsic quality of that which becomes in time. Becoming can in
fact be defined as that which transforms an empirical sequence
into a series: a burst of series. A series is a sequence of images,
which tend in themselves in the direction of a limit, which orients
and inspires the first sequence (the before), and gives way to
another sequence organized as series which tends in turn towards
another limit (the after). The before and the after are then no
longer successive determinations of the course of time, but the
two sides of the power, or the passage of the power to a higher
power. The direct time-image here does not appear in an order of
coexistences or simultaneities, but in a becoming as potentialization, as series of powers. This second type of chronosign, the
genesign, has therefore also the property of bringing into
question the notion of truth; for the false ceases to be a simple
appearance or even a lie, in order to achieve that power of
becoming which constitutes series or degrees, which crosses
limits, .carries out metamorphoses, and develops along its whole
path an act of legend, of story-telling. Beyond the true or the
false, becoming as power of the false. Genesigns present several
figures in this sense. Sometimes, as in Welles, they are characters
forming series as so many degrees of a ‘will to power’ through
which the world becomes a fable. Sometimes it is a character
himself crossing a limit, and becoming another, in an act of
story-telling which connects him to a people past or to come: we
have seen the paradox by which this cinema was called ‘cinémavérité' at the moment that it brought every model of the true into
question; and there is a double becoming superimposed for the
author becomes another as much as his character does (as with
Perrault who takes the character as ‘intercessor’ or with Rouch
who tends to become a black, in a quite different non-symmetrical
way). It is perhaps here that the question of the author and the

276                                                        Cinema 2
author’s becoming, of his becoming-other, is already posed in its
most acute form in Welles. Sometimes again, in the third place,
characters dissolve of their own accord, and the author is effaced:
there are now only attitudes of bodies, corporeal postures
forming series, and a gest which connects them together as limit.
It is a cinema of bodies which has broken all the more with the
sensory-motor schema through action being replaced by attitude,
and supposedly true linkage by the gest which produces legend or
story-telling. Sometimes, finally, the series, their limits and
transformations, the degrees of power, may be a matter of any
kind of relation of the image: characters, states of one character,
positions of the author, attitudes of bodies, as well as colours,
aesthetic genres, psychological faculties, political powers, logical
or metaphysical categories. Every sequence of images forms a
series in that it moves in the direction of a category in which it is
reflected, the passage of one category to another determining a
change of power. What is said in the most simple terms about
Boulez’ music will also be said about Godard’s cinema: having put
everything in series, having brought about a generalized
serialism. Everything which functions as limit between two series
divided into two parts, the before and the after constituting the
two sides of the limit, will also be called a category (a character, a
gest, a word, a colour may be a category as easily as a genre, from
the moment that they fulfil the conditions of reflection). If the
organization of series generally takes place horizontally, as in Slow
Motion with the imaginary, fear, business, music, it is possible that
the limit or category in which a series is reflected itself forms
another series of a higher power, henceforth superimposed on
the first: as in the pictorial category in Passion or the musical one
in First Name Carmen. There is in this case a vertical construction
of series, which tends to return to coexistence or simultaneity,
and to combine the two types of chronosigns.
   The so-called classical image had to be considered on two axes.
These two axes were the co-ordinates of the brain: on the one
hand, the images were linked or extended according to laws of
association, of continuity, resemblance, contrast, or opposition;
on the other hand, associated images were internalized in a whole
as concept (integration), which was in turn continually external­
ized in associable or extendable images (differentiation). This is
why the whole remained open and changing, at the same time as a
set of images was always taken from a larger set. This was the
double aspect of the movement-image, defining the out-of-field:

Conclusions                                                     277
in the first place it was in touch with an exterior, in the second
place it expressed a whole which changes. Movement in its
extension was the immediate given, and the whole which changes,
that is, time, was indirect or mediate representation. But there
was a continual circulation of the two here, internalization in the
whole, externalization in the image, circle or spiral which
constituted for cinema, no less than for philosophy, the model of
the True as totalization. This model inspired the noosigns of the
classical image, and there were necessarily two kinds of noosign.
In the first kind, the images were linked by rational cuts, and
formed under this condition an extendable world: between two
images or two sequences of images, the limit as interval is
included as the end of the one or as the beginning of the other, as
the last image of the first sequence or the first of the second. The
other kind of noosign marked the integration of the sequences
into a whole (self-awareness as internal representation), but also
the differentiation of the whole into extended sequences (belief
in the external world). And, from one to the other, the whole was
constantly changing at the same time as the images were moving.
Time as measure of movement thus ensured a general system of
commensurability, in this double form of the interval and the
whole. This was the splendour of the classical image.
   The modern image initiates the reign o f‘incommensurables’ or
irrational cuts: this is to say that the cut no longer forms part of
one or the other image, of one or the other sequence that it
separates and divides. It is on this condition that the succession or
sequence becomes a series, in the sense that we have just analysed.
The interval is set free, the interstice becomes irreducible and
stands on its own. The first consequence is that the images are no
longer linked by rational cuts, but are relinked on to irrational
cuts. We gave Godard’s series as an example, but they can be
found everywhere, notably in Resnais (the moment around which
everything turns and repasses in Je t’aime je t’aime, is a typical
irrational cut). By relinkage must be understood, not a second
linkage which would come and add itself on, but a mode of
original and specific linkage, or rather a specific connection
between de-linked images. There are no longer grounds for
talking about a real or possible extension capable of constituting
an external world: we have ceased to believe in it, and the image is
cut off from the external world. But the internalization or
integration of self-awareness in a whole has no less disappeared:
the relinkage takes place through parcelling, whether it is a

278                                                         Cinema 2
matter of the construction of series in Godard, or of the
transformations of sheets in Resnais (relinked parcellings). This
is why thought, as power which has not always existed, is born
from an outside more distant than any external world, and, as
power which does not yet exist, confronts an inside, an unthink­
able or unthought, deeper than any internal world. In the second
place, there is no longer any movement of internalization or
externalization, integration or differentiation, but a confron­
tation of an outside and an inside independent of distance, this
thought outside itself and this un-thought within thought. This is
the unsummonable in Welles, the undecidable in Resnais, the
inexplicable in the Straubs, the impossible in Marguerite Duras,
the irrational in Syberberg. The brain has lost its Euclidean
co-ordinates, and now emits other signs. The direct time-image
effectively has as noosigns the irrational cut between non-linked
(but always relinked) images, and the absolute contact between
non-totalizable, asymmetrical outside and inside. We move with
ease from one to the other, because the outside and the inside are
the two sides of the limit as irrational cut, and because the latter,
no longer forming part of any sequence, itself appears as an
autonomous outside which necessarily provides itself with an
inside.
   The limit or interstice, the irrational cut, pass especially
between the visual image and the sound image. This implies
several novelties or changes. The sound must itself become image
instead of being a component of the visual image; the creation of
a sound framing is thus necessary, so that the cut passes between
the two framings, sound and visual; hence even if the out-of-field
survives in fact [en fait], it must lose all power by right [de droit]
because the visual image ceases to extend beyond its own frame,
in order to enter into a specific relation with the sound image
which is itself framed (the interstice between the two framings
replaces the out-of-field); the voice-off must also disappear,
because there is no more out-of-field to inhabit, but two heau-
 tonomous images to be confronted, that of voices and that of
views, each in itself, each for itself and in its frame. It is possible
 for the two kinds of images to touch and join up, but this is clearly
 not through flashback, as if a voice, more or less off, was evoking
 what the visual image was going to give back to us: modern
 cinema has killed flashback, like the voice-off and the out-of-field.
 It has been able to conquer the sound image only by imposing a
 dissociation between it and the visual image, a disjunction which

Conclusions                                                     279
must not be surmounted: irrational cut between the two. And
yet there is a relation between them, a free indirect or incom­
mensurable relation, for incommensurability denotes a new re­
lation and not an absence. Hence the sound image frames a mass
or a continuity from which the pure speech act is to be extracted,
that is, an act of myth or story-telling which creates the event,
which makes the event rise up into the air, and which rises itself
in a spiritual ascension. And the visual image for its part frames
an any-space-whatever, an empty or disconnected space which
takes on a new value, because it will bury the event under stratigraphic layers, and make it go down like an underground fire
which is always covered over. T he visual image will thus never
show what the sound image utters. For example, in Marguerite
Duras, the originary dance will never rise up again through
flashback to totalize the two kinds of images. There will none the
less be a relation between the two, a junction or a contact. This
will be the contact independent of distance, between an outside
where the speech-act rises, and an inside where the event is
buried in the ground: a complementarity of the sound image,
the speech-act as creative story-telling, and the visual image,
stratigraphic or archaeological burying. And the irrational cut
between the two, which forms the non-totalizable relation, the
broken ring of their junction, the asymetrical faces of their con­
tact. This is a perpetual relinkage. Speech reaches its own limit
which separates it from the visual; but the visual reaches its own
limit which separates it from sound. So each one reaching its
 own limit which separates it from the other thus discovers the
common limit which connects them to each other in the incom­
 mensurable relation of an irrational cut, the right side and its ob­
 verse, the outside and the inside. These new signs are lectosigns,
 which show the final aspect of the direct time-image, the
 common limit: the visual image become stratigraphic is for its
 part all the more readable in that the speech-act becomes an
autonomous creator. Classical cinema was not short of lecto­
signs, but only to the extent that the speech-act was itself read in
 the silent film, or in the first stage of the talkie, making it pos­
 sible to read the visual image, of which it was only one com­
 ponent. From classical to modern cinema, from the movement-
 image to the time-image, what changes are not only the chrono-
 signs, but the noosigns and lectosigns, having said that it is
 always possible to multiply the passages from one regime to the
 other, just as to accentuate their irreducible differences.

280                                                        Cinema 2
                                 3
The usefulness of theoretical books on cinema has been called
into question (especially today, because the times are not right).
Godard likes to recall that, when the future directors of the new
wave were writing, they were not writing about cinema, they were
not making a theory out of it, it was already their way of making
films. However, this remark does not show a great understanding
of what is called theory. For theory too is something which is
made, no less than its object. For many people, philosophy is
something which is not ‘made’, but is pre-existent, ready-made in
a prefabricated sky. However, philosophical theory is itself a
practice, just as much as its object. It is no more abstract than its
object. It is a practice of concepts, and it must be judged in the
light of the other practices with which it interferes. A theory of
cinema is not ‘about’ cinema, but about the concepts that cinema
gives rise to and which are themselves related to other concepts
corresponding to other practices, the practice of concepts in
general having no privilege over others, any more than one object
has over others. It is at the level of the interference of many
practices that things happen, beings, images, concepts, all the
kinds of events. The theory of cinema does not bear on the
cinema, but on the concepts of the cinema, which are no less
practical, effective or existent than cinema itself. The great
cinema authors are like the great painters or the great musicians:
it is they who talk best about what they do. But, in talking, they
become something else, they become philosophers or theoreti­
cians —even Hawks who wanted no theories, even Godard when
he pretends to distrust them. Cinema’s concepts are not given in
cinema. And yet they are cinema’s concepts, not theories about
cinema. So that there is always a time, midday-midnight, when we
must no longer ask ourselves, ‘What is cinema?’ but ‘What is
philosophy?’ Cinema itself is a new practice of images and signs,
whose theory philosophy must produce as conceptual practice.
For no technical determination, whether applied (psychoanalysis,
linguistics) or reflexive, is sufficient to constitute the concepts of
cinema itself.

Notes

I Beyond the Movement-Image
 1 Bazin, What Is Cinema?, trans. Hugh Gray, Berkeley: University of
    California Press, 1971, Vol. II, p. 37 (and the wholeof the chapters
    on neo-realism). It is Amédée Ayfre who takes up and develops
    Bazin’s thesis to give it a pronounced phenomenological expres­
    sion: ‘Du premier au second néo-réalisme’, Le néo-réalisme italien,
    Etudes cinématographiques.
 2 On these films, cf. Jean-Claude Bonnet, 'Rossellini ou le parti pris
    des choses’, Cinématographe, no. 43, janvier 1979. This review
    devoted two special numbers to neo-realism, 42 and 43, with the
    very apt title ‘Le regard néo-réaliste'.
 3* Translators’ note: Deleuze uses the word ‘bal(l)ade\ an untransla­
    table pun on the words ballade (ballad) and balade (trip or voyage).
 4 James Cain’s novel, The Postman Always Rings Twice, has given rise to
    four pieces of work in the cinema: Pierre Chenil (Le dernier tournant,
     1939), Visconti (1942), Garnett (1946) and Rafelson (1981). The
    first is part of French poetic realism, and the latter two, of American
    action-image realism. Jacques Fieschi does a very interesting
    comparative analysis of the four Films: Cinématographe, no. 70,
    septembre 1981, pp. 8—9 (the reader is also referred to his article on
    Obsession, no. 42).
 5‘ These themes are analysed in Visconti, Etudes cinématographiques
    especially the articles by Bernard Dort and René Duloquin (cf.
    Duloquin, on the subject of Rocco and his Brothers, p. 86: ‘From the
    monumental staircase of Milan to the indistinct countryside, the
    characters float in a set whose boundaries they cannot reach. They
    are real, and so is the set, but their relation is not and approaches
    that of a dream.’).
 6 On this ‘communism’ in The Earth Trembles, cf. Yves Guillaume,
     Visconti, Editions Universitaires, p. 17 f.
 7 cf. the commentary by Noël Burch, Praxis du cinéma, Gallimard,
     pp. 112-18.
 8 Barthélémy Amengual, ‘Du spectacle au-spectaculaire', Fellini I,
    Etudes cinématographiques.
 9 Pierre Leprohon has emphasized this notion of report in An­
     tonioni: Antonioni, Seghers.
10* Translators’ note: ‘Instats’ is a neologism coined by Deleuze.
II Fellini has frequently claimed this sympathy for decadence (for
    instance, ‘it is not a trial by a judge, it is a trial conducted by an
    accomplice’, quoted by Amengual, op. cit., p. 9). In contrast, in
    relation to the world, and the feelings and characters which appear

282                                                Notes to pp. 6—11
   in it, Antonioni retains a critical objectivity in which there has
   been discerned an almost Marxist inspiration: cf. the analysis by
   Gérard Gozlan, Positif, no. 35, juillet 1960. Gozlan points to
   Antonioni’s fine text: how is it that men rid themselves with ease
   of their scientific and technical concepts when they turn out to be
   lacking or unsuitable, whilst they remain attached to ‘moral’
   beliefs and feelings which no longer bring anything but their
   unhappiness, even when they invent an even more harmful
   immoralism? (Antonioni’s words are reprinted in Leprohon,
   op. cit., pp. 104—6).
12 Antonioni, Cinéma 58, septembre 1958. And Leprohon’s formul­
   ation, op. cit., p. 76: ‘The story can only be read in filigree,
   through images which are consequences and no longer act.’
13 Robbe-Grillet, ‘Temps et description’, Pour un nouveau roman.
   Editions de Minuit, p. 127 (English translation: Snapshots, or To­
   wards a New Novel, trans. Barbara Wright, London: Calder &
   Boyars, 1965). We shall have frequent recourse to the theory of
   description in this text of Robbe-Grillet’s.
14 André Labarthe, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 123, septembre 1961.
15 Amengual, op. cit., p. 22.
16 Claude Oilier, Souvenirs écran, Cahiers du cinéma, Gallimard,
   p. 86. It is Oilier who analyses the breaks and injections in
   Antonioni’s images, and the role of the imaginary gaze which
   gives parts of space continuity. The excellent analyses by Marie-
   Claire Ropars-Wuilleumier may also be referred to: she shows
   how Antonioni does not simply move from a disconnected space
   to an empty one, but, simultaneously, from a person who is
   suffering from the absence of another to a person who is suffer­
    ing still more deeply from an absence in himself and in the world
    (‘L’espace et le temps dans l’univers d’Antonioni’, Antonioni,
   Etudes cinématographiques, pp. 22, 27—8, reprinted in L'Ecran de la
   mémoire. Seuil.
17 cf. the analyses by Michel Esteve, ‘Les nuits blanches ou le jeu du
    réel et de l'irréel’, Visconti, Etudes cinématographiques.
18 Sadoul, Chroniques du cinéma français, I, Paris: UGE, p. 370.
19 Oilier, op. cit., pp. 23—4 (on the space in Made in USA).
20 In Volume I we saw this special sense o f light in the French
    pre-war school, particularly in Grémillon, but Rivette carries it to
    a higher level, picking up Delaunay’s most elevated conceptions:
    ‘In contrast to the cubists, Delaunay does not look for the secrets
    of renewal in the presentation of objects, or more precisely of
    light at the level of objects. He holds that light creates forms by
    itself, independently of its reflections on matter . . . If light
    destroys objective forms, what it brings with it is its order and
    movement . . . It is then that Delaunay discovers that the move­
    ments which enliven light are different depending on whether
    the sun or the moon is more prominent . . . With the two
    fundamental spectacles of light in movement he associates the

Notes to pp. 11—15                                                       283
     image of the universe, in the form of the earthly globe presented as
     the locus of eternal mirages’ (Pierre Francastel, Du cubisme à l'art
     abstrait, Robert Delaunay, Bibliothèque de l’Ecole pratique des hautes
     études, pp. 19—29)..
21   Proust, Against Sainte-Beuve ‘Gérard de Nerval’. Proust ends his
     analysis by noting that a mediocre dream er is not going to see
     again the places that he has caught in his dream, since it is only a
     dream, whilst a true dream er goes there all the more because it is a
     dream.
22   Godard already said in relation to Vivre sa vie that ‘the external side
     of things’ must allow ‘the feeling of inside’ to be given: ‘How do we
     do the inside? Well, precisely by staying prudently outside’, like the
     painter. And Godard presents Two or Three Things . . . as adding a
     ‘subjective description’ to the ‘objective description’ to give a ‘feeling
     of a whole’ (Jean-Luc Godard par Jean-Luc Godard, Belfond,
     pp. 394—5.
23   Robbe-Grillet, op. cit., p. 66.
24   Emmanuel Carrère has clearly demonstrated this ‘attempt to
     approach tactile sensations’ (Wenier Herzog, Edilig, p. 25): not only
     in Land of Silence and Darkness, which puts before us some deaf and
     blind people, but in Kaspar Hauser which has grand dream-visions
     coexisting with little tactile gestures (for instance, the pressure of
     the thumb and fingers when Kaspar forces himself to think).
25   Donald Richie, Ozu, Editions Lettre du Blanc: ‘When he was about
     to get down to the script-writing, confident of his list of themes, he
     rarely wondered what the story was going to be. He asked himself
     instead which people were to occupy his film . . . A name was
     assigned to each character along with an arsenal of general
     characteristics appropriate to his family situation, father, daughter,
     aunt, but few recognizable traits. This character would grow, or
     rather the dialogue that gave him life would grow . . . beyond all
     reference to the plot or story . . . Although the opening scenes are
     always full of dialogue, the dialogue seems to turn on no particular
     subject . . . The character was thus constructed and modelled
     almost exclusively by virtue of the conversations he had’
     (pp. 15—26). And, on the ‘one shot, one line’ principle,
     cf. pp. 143—5.
26   Paul Schrader, Transcendental Style in Film: Ozu, Bresson, Dreyer
     (extracts in Cahiers du cinéma, no. 286, mars 1978).
27   Maurice Leblanc, La vie extravagante de Balthazar, Le Livre de Poche.
28   On colour in Ozu, see the remarks of Renaud Bezombes, Cinémato­
     graphe, no. 41, novembre 1978, p. 47, and no. 52, novembre 1979,
     p. 58.
29   Reference should be made to Noël Burch’s fine analysis of the
     ‘pillow shot’ and its functions: suspension of human presence,
      passage to the inanimate, but also reverse passage, pivot, emblem,
     contribution to the flatness of the image, pictorial composition (Pour
     un observateur lointain, Cahiers du cinéma Gallimard, pp. 175—86).

284                                                  Notes to pp. 15—23
    We simply wonder if there is not room to distinguish two different
    things in these ‘pillow shots’. Similarly for what Richie calls ‘still
    lifes’, pp. 164—70.
30 Dôgen, Shôbôgenzo, Editions de la Différence.
31 cf. Antonioni, ‘The horizon of events’ (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 290,
   juillet 1978, p. 11) which insists on European dualism. And, in a
    later interview, he returns briefly to this theme, pointing out that
    the Japanese raise the problem differently (no. 342, décembre
     1982).
32 Paul Rozenberg sees in this the essence of English romanticism: Le
    romantisme anglais, Larousse.
33 I. M. G. Le Clezio, ‘The extra-terrestrial’, in ‘Fellini’, L’Arc, no. 45,
    p. 28.
34 On Marxist criticism on the evolution of neo-realism and its
    characters, cf. Le néo-réalisme, Etudes cinématographiques, p. 102. And
    on Marxist criticism in Japan, especially against Ozu, cf. Noël
    Burch, op. cit., p. 283. It must be emphasized that in France the new
    wave, in its visionary aspect, was deeply understood by Sadoul.
35 cf. Jean-Luc Godard parJean-Luc Godard, p. 392.
36 Marc Chevrie analyses Jean-Pierre Léaud’s playing as ‘medium’ in
    terms close to Blanchot’s (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 351, septembre
     1983, pp. 31-3).
37 Criticism of metaphor is equally present in the new wave, with
    Godard, and in the new novel with Robbe-Grillet (Pour un nouveau
    roman). It is true that, more recently, Godard has taken inspiration
    from a metaphorical form, for instance, in the case of Passion: ‘The
    knights are metaphors for the bosses’ (Le Monde, 27 mai 1982), but,
    as we shall see, this form draws on a genetic and chronological
    analysis of the image, much more than on a synthesis or comparison
    of images.
38 D. H. Lawrence wrote an important piece in support of the image
    and against clichés in relation to Cézanne. He shows how parody is
    not a solution; and neither is the pure optical image, with its voids
    and disconnections. According to him, it is in the still lifes that
    Cézanne wins his battle against clichés, rather than in the portraits
    and landscapes (‘Introduction to these paintings’, Eros et le chiens,
    Bourgois, pp. 253-64). We have seen how the same remarks
    applied to Ozu.
39 ‘Lectosign’ refers to the Greek lekton or Latín dictum, which indicates
    what is expressed in a proposition independent of the relationship
    of this to its object. Similarly for the image when it is captured
    intrinsically, independent of its relationship with a supposedly
    external object.
40 Text of Antonioni’s quoted by Leprohon, op. cit., p. 103: ‘Now that
    we have today eliminated the problem of the bicycle (I am using a
    metaphor, try to understand beyond my words), it is important to
    see what there is in the spirit and heart of this man whose bicycle has
    been stolen, how he has adapted, what has stayed with him out of all

Notes to pp. 23—27                                                     285
   his past experiences of the war, the post-war and everything that has
   happened in our country.’ (And the text on Eros sick, pp. 104—6.)
41 Noël Burch is one of the first critics to have shown that the
   cinematographic image ought to be read no less than seen and
   heard; and this in connection with Ozu (Pour un observateur lointain,
   p. 175). But already in Praxis du cinéma Burch showed how Story of a
   Love Affair inaugurated a new relation between story and action,
   and gave the camera an ‘autonomy’, rather like that of a reading
   pp. 112—18; and on the ‘continuity grasped through discrepancy’,
   p. 47).

2 Recapitulation of Images and Signs
 1 On all these points, reference may be made to Christian Metz, Essais
   sur la signification au cinéma, Klincksieck (particularly Vol. I, ‘Langue
   ou langage?', and ‘Problèmes de dénotation’ which analyses the
   eight syntagmatic types). Raymond Bellour’s book L ’analyse du film.
   Albatros, is also essential. In an unpublished work, André Parente
   makes a critical study of this semiology, underlining the hypothesis
   of narrativity: Narrativité et non-narrativitéfilmiques.
 2 Metz, op. cit., I, pp. 96—9, and 51: Metz takes up Edgar Morin’s
   theme which is that the ‘cinematograph’ became ‘cinema’ by
   committing itself to a narrative direction, cf. Morin, Le cinéma ou
   l'homme imaginaire, Editions de Minuit, ch. 3.
 3 Metz had begun by underlining the weakness of paradigmatics, and
   the predominance of syntagmatics in the narrative code of cinema
   (Essais, I, pp. 73, 102). But his followers propose to show that, if the
   paradigm assumes a specifically cinematographic importance (and
   likewise other structural factors), there result new modes of
   narration, ‘dysnarrative’ ones. Metz returns to the question in
   Psychoanalysis and the Cinema: the imaginary signifier, trans. Celia
   Britton et al., London: Macmillan, 1983. For all this, nothing
   changed in the hypothesis of semiology, as we shall see.
 4 On this view, it must first be shown that ajudgem ent of resemblance
   or analogy is already subject to codes. However, these codes are not
   specifically cinematographic but socio-cultural in general. It must
   therefore be shown in addition that the analogical utterances
   themselves, in each area, refer to specific codes which no longer
   determine resemblance but internal structure: ‘It is not only from
   the outside that the visual message is partly invested by a language
   system. . . but equally from the inside and in its very visuality, which
   is only intelligible because its structures are pardy non-visual. . .Not
   everything is iconic in the icon . . .' Once one has opted for analogy
   by resemblance, one moves necessarily to a ‘beyond analogy’: cf.
   Christian Metz,£.Mats, II, pp. 157—9; and Umberto Eco, ‘Sémiologie
   des messages visuels’, Communications, no. 15, 1970.

286                                                 Notes to pp. 27—29
5 It is odd that, in order to distinguish the cinematographic image
  from a photo, Metz points, not to movement, but to narrativity (I,
  p. 53: ‘To go from one image to two images is to go from the image
  to language’). Moreover semiologists explicitly appeal to a suspen­
  sion of movement, in contrast, as they put it, to the ‘cinephilic gaze’.
6 On this ‘analogical-digital’circularity, cf. Roland Barthes, Elements of
  Semiology, trans. Annette Lavers and Colin Smith, New York: Hill &
  Wang, 1978, pp. 51-4 (II.4.3).
7 We shall see that the notion of the ‘model’ (modelling) in Bresson,
  elaborated as a result of the problem of the actor, but going far
  beyond this problem, is close to modulation. Similarly the ‘type’ or
  ‘typing’ in Eisenstein. These notions cannot be understood without
  contrasting them with the workings of the mould.
8 See the whole second part of Pasolini’s book, L'expérience hérétique,
  Payot. Pasolini shows on wliat conditions real objects should be
  considered as constituting the image, and the image as constitutive
  of reality. He refuses to talk of an ‘impression of reality’ given by
  cinema: it is simply reality (p. 170), ‘cinema represents reality
  through reality’, ‘I always stay within the framework of reality’,
  without interrupting it because of a symbolic or linguistic system
  (p. 199). It is the study of the preliminary conditions that Pasolini’s
  critics have not understood: it is conditions of principle [de droit] that
  constitute ‘cinema’, even though cinema does not actually exist
  outside particular films. So the object can indeed be just a referent in
   the image, and the image an analogical image which in turn refers to
  codes. But there is nothing to stop film in practice overtaking itself
  towards principle [droit], towards cinema as ‘Ur-code’ which,
   independently of any language system, makes the phoneme of the
   image from real objects and the moneme of reality from the image.
   Pasolini’s whole thesis loses all sense as soon as this study of the
   conditions of principle [de droit] is ignored. If it is worth making a
   philosophical comparison, Pasolini might be called post-Kantian
   (the conditions of legitimacy are the conditions of reality itself)»
   whilst Metz and his followers remain Kantians (bringing principle
   down to fact).
9 Eisenstein quickly abandons his theory of the ideogram for a notion
   of internal monologue, to which he thinks cinema gives an even
   greater extension than literature: ‘Film form, new problems’, Film
   Form, trans. Jay Leyda, London: Dennis Dobson, 1951, pp. 122—31.
   He first compares internal monologue to a primitive language
   system or a proto-language, as certain linguists of the Marr school
   had (cf. Eichenbaum’s text on cinema, in 1927, Cahiers du cinéma,
   nos 220—1.juin 1970). But the internal monologue is rather doser to
   a visual and sound method loaded with various expressional
   features: the great sequence in The General Line, after the success of
   the cream-making machine, would be a classic case. Pasolini, also,
   moved from the idea of primitive language system to that of
   material constituting an internal monologue: it is not arbitrary ‘to

Notes to pp. 29—35                                                     287
   say that cinema is based on a system of signs different from a system
   of written-spoken language systems, that is, that cinema is another
   language system. But not another language system in the sense that
   Bantu is different from Italian’ (pp. 161—2). The linguist Hjelmslev
   calls ‘content’ [matière] precisely this element which is not
   linguistically formed although it is perfectly formed from other
   points of view. He says ‘not semiotically formed’ because he
   identifies the semiotic function with the linguistic one. This is why
   Metz tends to exclude this material in his interpretation of
   Hjelmslev (cf. Language and Cinema, trans. Donna Jean Umiker-
   Sebeck, T he Hague: Mouton, 1974, ch. 10). But its specificity as
   signaletic material is none the less presupposed by a language: in
   contrast to the majority of linguists and critics of cinema inspired by
   linguistics, Jakobson attaches a great deal of importance to the
   notion of internal monologue in Eisenstein (‘Entretien sur le
   cinéma’, in Cinéma, théorie, lectures, Klincksieck).
10 Peirce, Ecrits sur le signe, commentary by Gérard Deledalle, Seuil: we
    reprint Deledalle’s table (p. 240):

                              First          Second            Third
     Representamen      Qualisign (1.1) Synsign (1.2) Legisign (1.3)
     Object             Icon (2.1)      Index (2.2) Symbol (2.3)
     Interprétant       Rheme (3.1) Dicisign (3.2) Argument (3.3)

11 Peirce, ibid, p. 30.
12 In Peirce, there are no intermediaries, but only ‘degenerate’ or
   ‘accretive’ types: cf. Deledalle, Théorie et pratique du signe, Payot,
   pp. 55-64.
13 Pasolini, op. cit., pp. 211—12. We already find in Epstein, from the
   same point of view, a fine discussion of cinema and death: ‘death
   makes its promises to us by cinematograph’ (Ecrits sur le cinéma,
   Seghers, I, p. 199).
14 Eisenstein sometimes criticizes himself for having given too much
   importance to montage or co-ordination in relation to the parts
   co-ordinated and their ‘analytic deepening1: as in the text
   ‘Montague 1938’, Film Form. But we shall see how difficult it is, in
    Eisenstein’s texts, to distinguish what is genuine and what is a show
    for Stalinist critics. In practice, from the outset, Eisenstein
   emphasized the need to consider the image or shot as an organic
   ‘cell’, and not as an indifferent element: in a text from 1929,
   ‘Methods of montage’, rhythmic, tonal and harmonic methods
   already consider the intrinsic content of each shot, according to
   deepening which takes increasing account of all the ‘potentialities’
   of the image. It none the less remains true that the two points of
   view —that of montage and that of image or shot —enter into an

288                                                 Notes to pp. 35-^45
   oppositional relation, even if this opposition has to be ‘dialectically’
   resolved.
15 Epstein, Ecrits, Seghers, pp. 184, 199 (and on ‘moving spaces’,
   ‘floating periods’and ‘danglingcauses’, pp. 364—79). On ‘impossible
   continuity shots’, cf. Eisenstein, p. 59. Noël Burch gives an analysis
   of the false continuities in the priest’s scene in Ivan the Terrible, in
   Praxis du cinéma, Gallimard, pp. 61—3.
16 Jean-Louis Schefer, L’homme ordinaire du cinéma. Cahiers du cinéma/
   Gallimard.
17 Godard, in connection with Passion, Le Monde, 27 mai 1982.
18 cf. Claude Beylie’s analysis in Visconti, Etudes cinématographiques.
19 René Prédal, Alain Resnais, Etudes cinématographiques, p. 120.
20 Proust, A la recherche dv temps perdu, Pléiade, III, p. 924.
21 Vertov, Articles, journaux, projets, Paris: UGE, pp. 129—32. ‘Negative’
   is obviously not to be understood in the sense of negation, but of
   indirect or derived: it is the derivative of the ‘visual equation’ of
   movement, which also allows the resolution of this primitive
   equation. The solution will be ‘the communist deciphering of
   reality'.
22 cf. Narboni, Sylvie Pierre and Rivette, ‘Montage’, Cahiers du cinéma,
   no. 210, mars 1969.
23 Robert Lapoujade, ‘Du montage au montrage’, in ‘Fellini’, L ’Arc.
24 Bonitzer, Le champ aveugle, Cahiers du cinéma/Gallimard, p. 130:
   ‘Montage becomes the order of the day again, but in an interroga­
   tive form that Eisenstein never gave it.’
25 Tarkovsky, ‘De la figure cinématographique’, Positif, no. 249,
   décembre 1981: ‘Time in cinema becomes the basis of bases, like
   sound in music, colour in painting . . . Montage is far from
   producing a new quality . . .’ cf. Michel Chion’s comments on this
   text of Tarkovsky, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 358, avril 1984, p. 41: ‘His
   profound intuition about the essence of cinema, when he refuses to
   assimilate it to a language which combines units such as shot,
   images, sounds, etc.’

3 From Recollection to Dreams
 1 Bergson, Matter and Memory, trans. Nancy Margaret Paul and
   W. Scott Palmer, London: Macmillan, 1911, pp. 126-9; hereafter
   cited as MM. And ‘Intellectual effort’, in Mind —Energy, trans. H.
   Wildon Carr, London: Macmillan, 1920, pp. 164—5; hereafter cited
   as M—E. We analysed the first chapter of MM in Volume I. Here we
   deal with the second chapter, which introduces a very different
   point of view. The third chapter, which is particularly concerned
   with time, will be discussed below.
 2 Claude Oilier, himself a nouveau roman writer, says in relation to
   Carabiniers: Godard ‘produces for each shot a very quick review of

Notes to pp. 45—50                                                   289
   its descriptive and suggestive virtualities before concentrating on
   one of them, then abandoning it, as soon as it has been indicated,
   precisely as he constitutes the whole work through a succession of
   renewed approaches, and at the very moment he finds it undoes it,
   gives almost the impression of losing interest in it, if not of
   purposely destroying it’ (Souvenirs écran. Cahiers du cinéma/
   Gallimard, p. 129).
 3 The theory of descriptions becomes one of the foundations of
   modern logic with Russell. But Bergson, in Matter and Memory, not
   only produces a psychology of recognidon, but proposes a logic of
   description utterly different from Russell’s. Robbe-Grillet's concep­
   tion, very strong logically, often extends Bergson's, and is related to
   it. cf. ‘Time and description’. Snapshots, or Towards a New Novel (‘a
   double movement of creation and erasure. . . ’).

 4 This is Bergson’s first great schema, MM, pp. 127—8. The difficulty
    evident in this schema arises from ‘the narrowest' circuit which is
    not presented in a form A A’, but A O, because it ‘contains only the
    object O itself with the consecutive image which returns to cover it’
    (memory immediately consecutive to perception). We shall see
    below the reason why there is such a minimum circuit which
    necessarily plays the role of internal limit.
 5 MM, pp. 69-77.
 6 cf. the analysis ofJour se lève by André Bazin, Le cinémafrançais de la
    libération à la nouvelle vague, Cahiers du cinéma/Editions de L’Etoile,
    pp. 53—75.
 7* Translators’ note: in Labyrinths, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970,
    pp. 44—54.
 8 On this notion of forking, cf. Prigogine and Stengers, Order out of
    Chaos: man’s new dialogue with nature, London: Heinemann, 1984,
    pp. 189-90.
 9* Translators’ note: in English in the original.
10 Philippe Carcassonne has produced an excellent analysis of the

290                                                  Notes to pp. 50—58
    Flashback in Mankiewicz, as shattering linearity and rebutting
   causality: ‘The Flashback would suggest a complementarity of times
    which would go beyond the temporal dimension; the past is not
   simply the before of the present, it is also its missing piece, the
    unconscious, and very often the ellipse.’ Carcassonne makes the
   comparison with Chabrol: ‘Far from dispersing the enigma, the
    return back often serves to underline it, even to make it more
   impenetrable, by indicating the lacunary chain of enigmas which
    preceded it’ (‘Coupez!’, Cinématographe, no. 51, octobre 1979).
11 Jean Narboni has indicated other points of comparison between the
   two authors: ‘Mankiewicz à la troisième person’, Cahiers du cinéma,
    no. 153, mars 1964.
12 This is the sense in which Janet understood it when he defined
    memory as story behaviour: I remember, 1 constitute a memory for
    myself to be able to tell a story. But Nietzsche had already defined
    memory as promise behaviour: I constitute a memory for myself in
   order to be capable of promising, of keeping a promise.
13 MM, pp. 162—3 and pp. 173—4.
14 Epstein, in all his written work, emphasized the subjective and
   dreamlike states which according to him characterized European
   cinema, especially French: Ecrits, II, p. 64 ff. Soviet cinema took on
   •dream states (Eisenstein, Dovzhenko . . .), but also pathological
    states of the amnesic type, with reconstitution of tatters of memo­
    ries: Ermler, The Man Who Lost his Memory. Expressionism’s encoun­
    ter with psychoanalysis was made directly about 1927, in the film by
    Pabst on which Abraham and Sachs collaborated, despite Freud’s
    reservations: Secrets of a Soul, which dealt with the obsessional states
    of a man who dreams of killing his wife with a knife.
15 MM, p. 129. In chapters II and III of Matter and Memory and III, IV
    and V of Mind —Energy, Bergson shows his constant interest in the
    phenomena of memory, dream and amnesia, but also of déjà-vu, of
    ‘panoramic vision’ (the vision of the dying, ‘the drowned and
    hung’). He points to something analogous to cinematographic
    speeding-up: M—E, pp. 105—6.
16 Mitry, Le cinéma expérimental, Seghers, p. 96.
17 Maurice Drouzy (Luis Bunuel architecte du rêve, Lherminier,
    pp. 40-3), analysing the contrast between the two films, remarks
    that Un chien andalou proceeds in particular through static shots,
    and includes only a few high-angle shots, dissolves and tracking
    shots forwards or backwards, one single low-angle shot, one wide
    shot, and one slow-motion shot; which is why Bunuel himself
    regarded it as a reaction against the avant-garde films of the time
    (not only Ent'racte, but Germaine Dulac’s La coquille et le clergyman,
    whose rich store of techniques was one of the reasons that Artaud,
    inventor of the idea and screen writer, turned against this film).
    However, the restrained concept itself implies technical virtuosities
    of a different kind: thus, on the problems thrown up for Keaton in
    the dream in Sherlock Junior (the back-projection process not yet

Notes to pp. 58—66                                                    291
    being in existence), cf. David Robinson, Buster Keaton, Image et son,
    pp. 53-4.
18 Michel Devillers, ‘Rêves informulés’, Cinématographe, no. 35, février
     1978. The author cites in particular Louis Malle: ‘The great night in
    the Lovers rests on a dreamlike state where the implication is linked
    to a depersonalization.’
19 This notion (‘the fact of being inhaled by the world’) has its origin in
    the psychiatric work of Binswanger.
20 Sartre, L'Imaginaire, Gallimard, pp. 324—5.
21 Amengual, Fellini II, Etudes cinématographiques, p. 90.
22 On vertically and kaleidoscopic vision in Busby Berkeley, cf. Mitry,
    Histoire du cinéma, Delarge, IV, pp. 185—8, and V, pp. 582—3.
23 Alain Masson, La comédie musicale, Stock, pp. 49—50. (And, on what
    Masson calls ‘degree zero’ or ‘entering dance’, cf. pp. 112—14, 122,
    220).
24 cf. Alain Masson’s excellent analysis of Donen, ibid., pp. 99—103.
25 Tristan Renaud, ‘Minnelli’, Dossiers du cinéma'. ‘The film set is not
    integrated into the mise-en-scène so as to become one of its consti­
    tutive parts, it is its motor’, to the extent that the dynamic of
    Minnelli’s films, more important than the story, ‘could be reduced
    to a journey through a certain num ber of film sets which would give
    a very precise measurement of the character’s evolution’.
26 Jacques Fieschi has analysed this ‘dark area’ of dream in Minnelli: in
    Yolande, the cruel washerwomen attempt to capture the man with
    sheets; and, in The Pirate, the man is not simply absorbed into the
    girl’s dream; she goes into a violent trance under the influence of
    the magician's ball (Cinématographe, no. 34, janvier 1978,
    pp. 16-18).
27 cf. Robert Benayoun, Bonjour Monsieur Lewis, Losefeld.
28* Translators’ note: in English in the original.
29 The three films mentioned are by Tashlin. But the collaboration of
    the two men makes attribution difficult, and the active autonomy of
    the object remains a constant in Lewis’s films. Gérard Recasens
    (Jeny Lewis, Seghers) sees grounds for Lewis’s comic quality in what
    he calls ‘the personification of the object’, which he distinguishes
    from the tools and machines of earlier burlesque: this distinction
    appeals to electronics, but also to a new range of movements and
    gestures.
30 Gérard Rabinovitch has analysed this mutation of gestures and
    movements, new sports, dances and gymnastics which correspond
    to the electronic age (Le Monde, 27 juillet 1980, p. 13). All kinds of
    movements can be found in Jerry Lewis which anticipate the recent
    dances of the ‘break’ or ‘sm urf type.
31 On the subject of dreaming in Lewis, cf. the two long analyses by
    André Labarthe (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 132, juin 1962) and by
    Jean-Louis Comolli (no. 197, février 1968). Comolli talks about a
    ‘ubiquity of waves [which] spread out’.
32 cf. Jean-Louis Schefer ‘La vitrine’, and Serge Daney, ‘Eloge de Tati’,

292                                                   Notes to pp. 66—71
    Cahiers du cinéma, no. 303, septembre 1979. From Mr Hulot’s
    Holiday, Bazin had shown how situations opened on to a time-image
    (‘M. Hulot et le temps’, (Qju’est-ce que le cinéma?, Editions du Cerf).
33* Translators’ note: a game in which the player who is ‘it’ must try to
    gain possession of one of the four corners, rather like ‘musical
    chairs’.
34 Claude Oilier noted these crossings or cross-checkings of char­
    acters, and these ‘slippages’ of action from Lola (which Demy had
    conceived as a sung comedy) onwards: Souvenirs écran, p. 42.
    Similarly, in A Room in Town, Jacques Fieschi points out the scenes
    that make the characters intersect with each other in the colonel’s
    flat, as if in a ‘charmed circle’ which goes beyond narration; and
    Dominique Rinieri emphasizes the pictorial autonomy of the film
    set, and the ‘unhooking of action’ in the music (cf. Cinématographe,
    no. 82, octobre 1982).

4 The Crystals of Time
 1 Bergson, MM, pp. 166-7, M—E, pp. 135-6: we saw in the last
   chapter how the Bergsonian schema of circuits appeared to have an
   anomaly when we considered ‘the narrowest’ circle, the one that was
   ‘the nearest to immediate perception’: MM, p. 127.
 2 Jean Ricardou has developed the theory of descriptions in this
   double direction of ‘capture’ and ‘freeing’: sometimes characters
   and events which are apparently real become fixed in a ‘represen­
   tation’, sometimes the opposite: Le nouveau roman, Seuil, pp. 112—
   21. These procedures are common in Robbe-Grillet’s films.
 3 cf. what Hjelmslev says o f‘content’ and ‘expression’: ‘It is impossible
   to maintain that it is legitimate to call one of these dimensions
   expression and the other content, and not the reverse; their
   definition is a matter of solidarity involving them both, and neither
   of them can be defined more specifically. Taken separately, they can
   only be defined by opposition and in a relative way, as functives of a
   single function which contrast with one another.’ (Prolégomènes à une
   théorie du langage. Editions de Minuit, p. 85).
 4 Bachelard, La terre et les rêveries de la volonté, Corti, p. 290 (about the
   crystal).
 5 On ‘camera movement through 360° with several mirrors’, cf.
   Ciment, Le livre de Losey, Stock, pp. 261—2, 274.
 6 Serge Daney observed that, in eastern European cinema, scientific
   power undergoes a significant expansion, because it is the only kind
   that can be shown and subjected to criticism (political power being
   out of reach): hence the coexistence of everyday life and a scientific
   discourse ‘off. cf. La rampe, Cahiers du cinéma/Gallimard, p. 99 (on
   the subject of Zanussi and Makavejev).
 7 Peter Cowie, ‘La chute d’un corps’, Cinématographe, no. 87, mars

Notes to pp. 71—77                                                      293
      1983, p. 6. This article contains an excellent analysis of the whole of
     Zanussi’s work.
 8 cf. Jean-Marie Sabatier’s analysis of Browning, Les classiques du
     cinéma fantastique, Balland, pp. 83-5: ‘The whole of Browning’s
     work rests on the spectacle-reality dialectic . . . This readiness of the
     actor to be transformed from real man to dreamed man, with the
     growth of power which that implies, is not really a consequence of
     the theme of the double as it occurs in the German Romantics or in
     the Jekyll and Hyde myth. Rather than a double, it is a matter of a
     reflection, a reflection that exists only because of someone else’s
     gaze, while, beneath the mask, the face lives in shadow.'
 9 On the ship, vision, the visible and the invisible, the transparent and
     the opaque in Melville’s work, cf. Régis Durand, Melville, Age
     d’homme, and Philippe Jaworski, ‘Le désert et l’empire’, thesis,
     University of Paris VII.
10 On the resemblance between Herzog’s landscapes and the crystal­
     line and visionary painting of Friedrich, cf. Alain Masson, ‘La toile
     et l’écran’, Positif, no. 159.
11* Translators’ note: the word ‘lavé’ has the sense o f ‘washed out’ or
    ‘watery’ and of the ‘wash’ used by an artist.
12 Serge Daney, Libération, 27 janvier 1982: ‘The Americans have
     taken the study of continuous movement a very long way . . . a
     movement which empties the image of its weight and its material. ..
     In Europe, even in the USSR, there are those who allow themselves
     the luxury of questioning movement in its other side: slowed down
     and discontinuous. Paradjanov, Tarkovsky (but already Eisenstein,
     Dovzhenko or Barnet) watch matter accumulate and become
     blocked; a geology of elements, filth and treasures being created in
     slow motion. They create the cinema of the Soviet Bloc, that
     motionless empire. W hether the empire likes it or not.’
13 Daniel Rocher has made a detailed analysis of the white and the
     black, the limpid and the opaque, and their distribution and
     exchange in Last Year in Marienbad: cf. Alain Resnais et Alain
     Robbe-Grillet, Etudes cinématographiques. And Robert Benayoun,
     stressing the tiling, the white frosts and the black jewels: Marienbad
     ‘is a sort of fortune-teller’s crystal-ball’ (Alain Resnais arpenteur de
     l’imaginaire. Stock, p. 97).
14 Raymond Bellour and Alain Virmaux compared Fellini’s 8 'A with
     Gide’s novel in a general way: Fellini I, Etudes cinématographiques.
15 Frédéric Vitoux underlines the crystalline aspect of the images of
     the sailor led into the house: ‘A very bright yellow light falls on the
     sailor giving him a luminous oudine, whilst the room as a whole and
     Mr Clay himself remain in the cold penumbra of blue-grey lights’
     (Positif, no. 167, mars 1975, p. 57).
16 The review Cinématographe devoted two special issues to ‘money in
     cinema’, nos 26 and 27, avril and mai 1977. Analysing the films
     where money plays an important role, we encounter, as it were
     naturally, the theme of the film reflected in the film. A forerunner is

294                                                   Notes to pp. 77—81
      the article by Mireille Latil, ‘Bresson et l’argent’, which analyses the
      role and importance of money in the work of Bresson well before
      the production of the film of the same name.
17    Marcel l’Herbier, ‘Le cinématographe et l’espace, chronique finan­
      cière’, reprinted in Noël Burch, Marcel l’Herbier, Seghers, pp. 97—
      104.
18    M—E, p. 130: ‘How would recollection only arise after everything is
      over?’ It will be noted that Bergson does not talk about crystal: the
      only images he points to are optical, acoustic, or magnetic.
19    M -E, pp. 135-8.
20    M—E, p. 135.
21    All these themes are dealt with in MM, ch. III.
22    Hence Bergson’s second great schema, the famous cone of MM,
      p. 211.

   The point S is clearly the actual present; but this is not strictly
   speaking a point, since it already includes the past of this present,
   the virtual image which doubles the actual image. As for the AB,
   A’B’ . . . sections of the cone, they are not psychological circuits to
   which recollections-images would correspond; they are purely
   virtual circuits, each of which contains all our past as this is
   preserved in itself (pure recollection). Bergson is quite unequivocal
   in this respect. Psychological circuits of recollection-images or
   dream-images are produced only when we ‘leap’ from S to one of
   these sections, to actualize some virtuality of it which must then
   move down into a new present S’.
23 M—E, p. 130. This is the third schema, which Bergson does not feel
   the need to draw:

Notes to pp. 81—87                                                   295

                                                ¿1
24 Jean Ricardou, p. 73. Similarly, referring to Browning’s work,
   Sabatier said: it is a reflection, not a double.
25 Félix Guattari produced this idea of ‘crystal of time’: L’inconscient
   machinique, Ed. Recherches.
26 Michel Devillers, ‘Ophiils ou la traversée du décor’, Cinématographe,
   no. 33, décembre 1977. In the same issue, Louis Audibert (‘Max
   Ophiils et la mise en scène’) analyses a double tension in the
   crystal-image in Ophiils: on the one hand the transparent side and
   the opaque side (hiding-places, bars, fetters, spy-holes) of the crystal
   itself: on the other hand, the immobility, and the movement of what
   is seen in the crystal. Each character is followed on his course to a
   point of immobility which usually coincides with a stationary figure
   or film set, a brief moment of uncertainty . . . Movement, in
   fantastic ellipses, tears time from the wretched dimension of space.’
   As in the succession of waltzes in Madame de. . . .
27 Bazin pointed to this substitution of the scene by the shot, brought
   about by depth of field: Jean Renoir, Champ libre, pp. 80-4 (and
    What Is Cinema}, Vol. I, pp. 91—3). But, for him, depth of field has a
   reality-function, even and especially when it underlines the
   ambiguity of the verb. On the other hand, we think that there are
    many different functions of depth depending on authors and films
   alike. Michael Romm saw in it a theatrical function (L’art du cinéma de
    Pierre Lherminier, Seghers, pp. 227—9). And it is often so in Renoir,
    even if the function changes or evolves into the flow of the sequence
    shot.
28 On Renoir’s ‘apparent casualness’, cf. Bazin, pp. 69-71. The fact is
    that often in Renoir the actor plays the role of a character in the
    process o»~ nimself playing a role: thus Boudu tries successive roles
    in the bookshop, and, in La règle du jeu, the gamekeeper tries the
    role of manservant, as the marquis tries all aspects of the role of
    marquis. Rohmer will talk in this regard of a kind of exaggeration in
    Renoir, and points to the selective function which becomes evident
    in it: ‘This exaggeration has its respites, as if the actor, tired of
    pretending, got his wind back, not by becoming himself (the actor)
    again, but by identifying with the character. With the result that
    credibility is strengthened: the character, playing his character,
    becomes the character again, when he is not playing, whilst the
    actor, playing the character, only becomes the actor again’ (Le gout
    de la beauté. Cahiers du cinéma/Editions de l’Etoile, p. 208.
29 cf. Truffaüt, in Bazin, pp. 260—2. It is in The Golden Coach that
    Renoir’s question, ‘Where does theatre end and life begin?’, occurs.

296                                                  Notes to pp. 89—97
30 This is true not only of Fellini. Oilier gave a complete breakdown of
    the types of image in Last Year in Marienbad: recollection-images,
    desire, pseudo-recollection, fantasy, hypothesis, calculation (‘Ce
    soir à Marienbad’, La Nouvelle Revue française, octobre et novembre
    1961).
31 Barthélémy Amengual devoted two articles to the idea of spectacle
    and its evolution in Fellini: Fellini I and II. He shows how, in the
    earlier films, it is still a matter of leaving and finding an exit, but,
    from Cabiria, one returns; and later there is no question of getting
    out at all: I, pp. 15—16. Amengual analyses the halo-like and
    compartmentalized form of the giant Luna Park or ‘universal
    exhibition’ that Fellini constructs from one film to the next: II,
    pp. 89-93. He rightly contrasts him with Renoir, but in terms that
    are hard on Renoir (I, p. 26). We, however, do not see in what
    respect the theme o f‘theatre-life’ is less profound in Renoir than in
    Fellini’s conception of the spectacle, as long as we place these
    reflections in their respective cinematographic context: outside this
    context, both alike are worthless.
32 cf. Mireille Latil-Le Dantec’s analysis of Clowns, in Fellini II.
33 cf. Henry Miller’s pages for an opera project with Varèse: The
    Air-Conditioned Nightmare, Heinemann: London, 1962, pp. 152-8.
34 Guattari specifically develops his analysis of the ‘crystal of time’ in
    relation to the ritornello or ‘little phrase’ in Proust’s words:
    Guattari, op. cit., pp. 239 ff.’ Reference may also be made to
    Clément Rosset’s text on the ritornello, notably on Ravel’s Boléro:
    ‘Archives', La Nouvelle Revue française, no. 373, février 1984. And,
    on the gallop as musical schema identified through very different
    cultures, cf. François-Bernard Mâche, Musique, mythe, nature,
    Klincksieck, p. 26.
35* Translators’ note: ‘Augustes’, strictly a type of circus clown, heavily
    made up and brightly costumed, who perform ‘linking pieces’.
36 Philippe de Lara, Cinématographe, no. 30, septembre 1977, p. 20: ‘If
    Terra Trema was a character-film, the most important character
    would be time: its rhythms, its cutting constitute the film’s material;
    it is time which, in the argument, is the principal reason for the
    fishermen’s failure.’
37 It is possible to make a list of themes linking Visconti and Proust: the
    crystalline world of aristocrats; its internal decomposition; history
    seen crosswise (the Dreyfus affair, the 1914 war); the too-late of lost
    time, which also gives the unity of art or rediscovered time; classes
    defined as families of spirit rather than social groups . . . Bruno
    Villien has made a very interesting comparative analysis of the
    projects of Visconti and of Losey (scenario by Harold Pinter):
    Cinématographe, no. 42, décembre 1978, pp. 25—9. However, we
    cannot go along with this analysis because it credits Losey—Pinter
    with an awareness of time which would be lacking in Visconti, who
    would give an almost naturalistic version of Proust. The opposite
    would rather be the case: Visconti is in a profound sense a

Notes to pp. 97—103                                                    297
    film-maker of time, while the ‘naturalism’ specific to Losey leads
    him to subordinate time to originary worlds and their drives (we
    have tried to show this earlier). It is a point of view which is also
    present in Proust.
38 Baroncelli, Le Monde, 18 juin 1963.

5 Peaks of Present and Sheets of Past
 1* Translators’ note: the ratio cognoscendi of a thing is its being in the
    mode of being known; the ratio essendi of a thing is its essence or
    ‘formal reason’.
 2 This is the development of the themes of ch. Ill of Matter and
    Merr. ry that we saw earlier (the second schema of tíme, the cone):
    pp. 210-25.
 3 This fine piece by Groethuysen (‘De quelques aspects du temps’,
    Recherches philosophiques, V, 1935—6) has echoes of Péguy and
    Bergson. In Clio, p. 230, Péguy made a distinction between history
    and memory: ‘History is essentially longitudinal, memory essen­
    tially vertical. History essentially consists of passing along the event.
    Being inside the event, memory essentially and above all consists of
    not leaving it, staying in it and going back through it from within.’
    Bergson had proposed a schema, what might be called his fourth
    schema of time, to distinguish between the spatial vision which
     passes along the event, and the temporal vision which goes deep
     inside the event: MM, p. 184.

 4 Kafka, Un champion dejeune, IV.
 5 Daniel Rocher has compared Marienbad and Mallarmé’s dice throw,
   ‘num ber starry progeny’, ‘total addition in formation’: Alain Resnais
   et Alain Robbe-Grillet, Etudes cinématographiques.
 6 cf. Jean-Claude Bonnet, ‘L’innocence du rêve’, Cinématographe,
   no. 92, septembre 1983, p. 16.
 7 ‘T he sadistic characters in my novels are always of a special sort in

298                                                  Notes to pp. 103—109
      that they attempt to immobilize something which is moving’; in
      Trans-Europe Express, the young woman never stops moving in every
      direction: ‘Him, he is there, he is watching me, and I think that you
      can feel arising in him the desire to stop that.’ It is thus a
      transformation from a motor-situation to a purely optical situation.
      The passage is quoted by André Gardies, Alain Robbe-Grillet,
      Seghers, p. 74.
8     Mireille Latil-Le Dantec, ‘Notes sur la fiction et l'imaginaire chez
      Resnais et Robbe-Grillet’, Alain Resnais and Alain Robbe-Grillet,
      p. 126. On a chronology of Marienbad, cf. Cahiers du cinéma, nos 123
      and 125.
9     Many commentators see this necessity of going beyond the level of
      the real and the imaginary: beginning with the adherents of a
      language-based semiology who find in Robbe-Grillet a key example
      (cf. Chateau and Jost, Nouveau cinéma nouvelle sémiologie, Editions de
      Minuit, and Gardies, Le cinéma de Robbe-Grillet, Albatros). But, for
      them, the third level is that of the ‘signifier’, whilst our enquiry
      concerns the time-image and its a-signifying power.
10    This is the difference suggested by Robbe-Grillet between Proust
      and Faulkner (Snapshots, or Towards a New Novel). And, in the
      chapter ‘Time and description’, he says that the new novel and
      modern cinema are very litde concerned with time; he criticizes
      Resnais for being too interested in memory and forgetting.
11    cf. MM, p. 223.
12    Petr Krai, ‘Le film comme labyrinthe’, Positif, no. 256, juin 1982:
      ‘We cross the court and the years that slipped away at the same
      tíme.’
13    On the opposition between these two ideas of depth, in the sixteenth
      and seventeenth centuries, cf. Wôlfflin, Principles in the History of Art,
      London: Bell, 1932, ch. II. Wôlfflin analyses the ‘baroque’ spaces of
      the seventeenth century on the basis of Tintoretto’s diagonals, the
      anomalies of dimension in Vermeer, the gaps in Rubens, etc.
14    Claudel said that depth, for instance, in Rembrandt, was an
      ‘invitation to recall’ (‘sensation has aroused recollection, and
      recollection in turn reaches and successively destroys the superim­
      posed layers of memory’, L’oeil écoute, Oeuvres en prose, Pléiade,
      p. 195). Bergson and Merleau-Ponty showed how ‘distance’ (MM,
      ch. 1), and ‘depth’ (Phenomenology of Perception) were temporal
      dimensions.
15    cf. Wôlfflin, op. cit., p. 97 and p. 185.
16    The Bazin—Mitry discussion is relevant to both problems. But it
      seems that Mitry is much closer to Bazin than he thinks. In the first
      place, is there something new in Welles’s depth of field or is it the
      return to an old procedure which was an inseparable part of earlier
      cinema, as Mitry reminds us? Yet it is Mitry himself who shows how,
      in Intolerance, there is only juxtaposition of parallel shots and not
      interaction as in Renoir and Welles (with the great angular shots):
      he thus confirms Bazin’s view of this social point, cf. Esthétique et

Notes to pp. 109—113                                                  299
   psychologie du cinéma, Ed. Universitaires, II, p. 40. In the second
   place, is the function of this new depth a freer reality-funcdon, or is
   itjust as restrictive as any other depth, as Mitry believes? In any case,
   Bazin willingly recognized the theatrical character of depth of field,
   in Wyler as much as in Renoir. He analyses one of Wyler’s shots, in
   The Snake, where the fixed camera records the totality of a scene in
   depth, as in the theatre. But, in fact, the cinematographic element
   means that the character situated in the sitting-room may leave the
   frame twice, first to the right in the foreground, then to the left in
   the background, before falling down the stairs: the out-of-frame
   has a quite different function from the wings of a theatre (‘William
   Wyler ou le janséniste de la mise en scène’, Revue du cinéma, nos 10
   and 11, février and mars 1948). Cinema here produces an ‘excess of
   theatricality’, which will in the end strengthen the feeling of reality.
   What can be said, then, is that Bazin, while acknowledging the
   plurality of functions enjoyed by depth of field, upheld the primacy
   of the reality-function.
17 MM, p. 125: the two forms of memory are ‘sheets of recollections’
   and the ‘contraction’ of the present.
18 Bazin has often analysed this kitchen scene, but without making it
   dependent on the function of remembering which takes place (or
   tries to take place) in it. Yet the same thing often happens in Wyler,
   depth being linked to the recollections of two characters: as in a
   sequence shot in The Best Years of Our Life analysed by Bazin in his
   article on Wyler, but also a shot in L ’insoumise analysed by Mitry,
   where two characters meet again and confront each other in a kind
   of memory challenge (the heroine has put on her red dress
   again...). In this last example, depth of field produces a maximum
   contraction which would be impossible by shot-reverse shot: the
   camera is in a low-angle position behind one of the characters, and
   simultaneously catches the clenched hand of one and the trembling
   face of the other (Mitry).
19 Jean Collet, ‘La soif du mal, ou Orson Welles et la soif d’une
   transcendance’, Orson Welles, Etudes cinématographiques, p. 115 (there
   is one point where we have to disagree with this text, as we will see
   below, namely the appeal to transcendance).
20 MM, p. 133 : according to Bergson these are the two principal forms
   of illness of memory.
21 In contrast to arbitrary comparisons, Amengual is right to make a
   point-by-point comparison between Rosebud (or the glass ball) and
   Proust’s madeleine: there is no search for lost time in Welles, cf.
   Etudes cinématographiques, pp. 64—5.
22 ‘The very foundations of existence are tragic. Man is not living, as
   people are fond of saying, in a transient crisis. The whole thing has
   always been a crisis.’ (Quoted by Michel Estève. ‘Notes sur les
   fonctions de la mort dans l’univers de Welles’, Etudes cinématogra­
   phiques, p. 41.)
23 The hero is an ordinary man, but ‘conscious of his madness’.

300                                               Notes to pp. 113—117
     Confronted with these pasts that he does not know of or recognize,
     he says: ‘I thought I was in the grip of delirium, then reason
     returned, and it was- then that I thought I was mad.’ Gérard
     Legrand shows that two levels may be envisaged: Welles the actor,
     who plays the character of O’Hara, hollowly, as a hallucinated
     sleepwalker; and Welles the author, who projects himself into the
     three hallucinating characters (Positif, no. 256, juin 1982).
24 It is the topography of The Trial (and also of The Castle) which calls
     on a depth of field: places that are very far apart or even opposed, in
     the foreground, are next to each other in the background. To the
     extent that space, as Michel Ciment puts it, is constantly dis­
     appearing: ‘The viewer, as the film develops, loses all sense of space,
     and the painter’s house, the courthouse and the church are from
     then on in contact with each other.’ (Les conquérants d’un nouveau
     monde, Gallimard, p. 219.)
25 . Herman Melville, Pierre, or the ambiguities, American Library: New
     York, 1964.
26 Bazin, Orson Welles, Ed. du Cerf, p. 90. Michel Chion finds the same
     motif earlier in the opening of Citizen Kane: ‘To a cavernous,
     archaic music, disparate landscapes succeed each other in an
     atmosphere of primitive chaos, of total disorder where the elements
     of earth and water are not yet separate. The only traces of life are
     monkeys, a reference to a pre-human p a st.. .’ (La voix au cinéma.
     Cahiers du cinéma Editions de l’Etoile, p. 78.)
27 Michel Chion, recalling the influence that radio continually exer­
     cised on Welles, talks about a ‘central immobility of the voice’, even
     when it is the voice of characters in movement. And, correlatively,
     moving bodies themselves tend to a massive inertia which will
     embody the fixed point of the voice, cf. ‘Notes sur la voix chez Orson
     Welles’, Orson Welles, Cahiers du cinéma, p. 93.
28 In Hiroshima mon amour, the present is the place of a forgetting
     which is already concerned with itself, and the character of the
     Japanese man is as it were blurred. In Last Year in Marienbad,
     Marie-Claire Ropars sums up the whole as follows: ‘At the point
     where the account, imaginary or not, of a first meeting in
     Marienbad has become totally bound up with the second meeting,
     which it has modified, at this moment the present story of this
     second meeting in turn tips over into the past, and the narrator’s
     voice begins again to recall it in the imperfect, as if a third meeting
     were now being prepared, overshadowing the one that has just
     taken place, rather as if this whole story never ceased being a past
     one . . .’ (L’écran de la Mémoire, Seuil, p. 115).
29 Bernard Pingaud, in particular, underlined this disappearance of
     the fixed point in Resnais (in contrast to Welles), which was already
     in Hiroshima mon amour: cf. Premier Plan, no. 18, octobre 1961.
30 It is a matter of the precise moment when the machine is considered
     to be taking the hero back, the minute when he came out of the
     watër on to the beach, which is taken up and modified throughout

Notes to pp. 117—122                                                301
    the film. Gaston Bounoure comments: ‘Claude has swum, swims
   and will swim around this minute in which his whole life is enclosed.
    Unassailable and inaccessible, it flashes like a diamond in the
   labyrinth of time.’ (Alain Resnais, Seghers, p. 86.)
31 An analysis of the Boulanger transformations, and the notion of age
    which goes with them, may be found in Prigogine and Stengers,
   Order out of Chaos, pp. 267—80. The authors draw some original
   conclusions which link up with Bergson. There is a close relation
    between Prigogine’s transformations and the sections of the
    Bergsonian cone. O ur concern with all this is with its simplest and
    least scientific aspects. The intention, basically, is to show that
    Resnais does not apply scientific data to cinema but creates, in his
    particular cinematographic way, something that has its counterpart
    in mathematics and physics (and also in biology, explicidy invoked
   in My American Uncle). We might talk about an implicit relation
   between Resnais and Prigogine and likewise between Godard and
    René Thom.
32 cf. René Prédal, Alain Resnais, Etudes cinématographiques, p. 23.
33 One of the finest books on Resnais is that of Gaston Bounoure,
   because of its power and density. He is the first to suggest relations
    between the short and long features in which they throw light on
    each other. He understands memory in Resnais as a memory-world
    in which infinity goes beyond recollection, and mobilizes all the
    faculties (e.g., p. 72). And he analyses in particular the relation
    between the continuous shot and hacked montage as two things in
   correlation: cf. his commentary on Muriel, on what he calls ‘seasons’
    (what we call ‘ages’), and on the shared idendty of cutting-
   continuum and cut-sliding (pp. 62—5). On fragmentation in Muriel,
   reference may also be made to Didier Goldschmidt, ‘Boulogne mon
   am our’, Cinématographe, no. 88, avril 1983.
34 Marié-Claire Ropars-Wuilleumier, p. 69: ‘It is no accident (in
   Muriel) that everything begins in alternating close-ups of everyday
   objects, a door-knob, a kettle, and ends in an empty flat where
   static roses seem suddenly artificial.’ And Robert Benayoun: ‘At
    the opening of My American Uncle, Resnais makes a catalogue of
    model objects pass before us juxtaposed with landscapes or
    portraits without establishing any hierarchy between them’ (Alain
   Resnais arpenteur de l’imaginaire, Stock, p. 185). The reader is also
    referred to René Prédal’s chapter, ‘Des objets plus parlants que les
   êtres’.
35 Youssef Ishaghpour, D’une image à l’autre. Médiations, p. 182.
36 Buonoure, op. cit., p. 67.
37 Robert Benayoun, for instance, challenges from the outset any
   interpretation of Resnais by memory, or even by time (pp. 163,
    177). But he hardly justifies his view, and it seems that for him
    memory and time are reducible to flashback. For his part, Resnais is
   less simple, and more Bergsonian: ‘I have always protested against
    the word memory, but not against the word imaginary or the word

302                                               Notes to pp. 122—128
   consciousness . . . If cinema is not a method of juggling specifically
   with time, in any event the method which is the best adapted to it. . .
   This is not the consequence of a deliberate act of will. I think that the
   theme of memory is present each time that a piece is written or a
   painting painted .. . Personally, I prefer the words consciousness
   and imaginary rather than memory, but consciousness is obviously
   part of memory’ (pp. 212—13).
38 M—E, pp. 131-2. And MM, pp. 170-1.
39 cf. Robbe-Grillet, L'année dernière à Marienbad, Editions de Minuit,
   p. 13 : ‘The whole film is the story of a persuasion.’ And Resnais talks
   of hypnosis, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 123, septembre 1961.
40 Benayoun, op. cit., p. 205.
41 In his interviews, Resnais often returns to these two themes:
   feelings beyond characters, and the gaining of awareness or the
   critical thought which results. This is a method of critical hypnosis
   closer to what Dali called the critical-paranoiac method than to
   Brecht’s methods. René Prédal has brought this aspect out well: ‘If
   Brecht, in the theatre, achieved this result by distantiation, Resnais,
   by contrast, arouses a true fascination. This sort of hypnosis, of
   purely aesthetic origin, de-dramatizes the anecdote, prevents
   identification with the characters and directs the public’s attention
   to the lonely feelings which drive the hero’ (op. cit., p. 163).
42 Je t’aime je t’aime fits this formulation very well. There is a real
   affinity, it seems to us, between Resnais’ work and Andrei Bely’s
   great novel Petersburg which is based on what Bely calls ‘the biology
   of shadows’ and ‘the cerebral game’. With Bely the city and the brain
   are in topological contact; ‘all that passed before his eyes, paintings,
   piano, mirrors, mother-of-pearl, the inlay of the tables, was all just
   stimulation of the cerebral membrane, unless it was deficiency of
   the cerebellum’; and a continuum is continuously produced be­
   tween visceral organic states, political states of society and meteoro­
   logical states of the world. In this regard Providence is particularly
   close to Bely’s novel. There is a method of critical hypnosis in both
   authors, cf. Bely, Petersburg, translated by Robert A. Maguire and
   John E. Malmstad, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1983.

6 The Powers of the False
 1 At the beginning of chapter 111 of MM, Bergson shows initially how
   common sense is opposed to two poles of existence, the connections
   which determine a continuity and discontinuous appearances to
   consciousness. But, from a more profound perspective, these are
   two elements which refuse separation and mix together to various
   degrees: pp. 189-91.
 2 Sylvette Baudrot says, in relation to Last Year in Marienbad, the film
   ‘is entirely composed of false continuities . . . there are only

Notes to pp. 128—134                                                     303
   continuities of feelings’. Similarly in Muriel, or in La guerre estfinie; if
   the character moved from right to left in one shot, in the following
   shot he had to move from left to right, or come straight forward, so
   that there is a shock, a contrast. (Alain Resnais, L ’Arc, no. 31, p. 50).
 3 Gilbert Simondon, L’individu et sa genèse physico-biologique, PUF,
   p. 233.
 4 cf. P. M. Schuhl, Le dominateur et les possibles, PUF (on the role of this
   paradox in Greek philosophy). Jules Vuillemin has taken up the
   whole question in Nécessité ou contingence. Editions de Minuit.
 5 cf. Leibniz, Theodicy, sections 414—16; in this astonishing text, which
   we consider a source of all modern literature, Leibniz presents
   ‘contingent futures’ as so many compartments making up a
    pyramid of crystal. In one compartment Sextus does not go to Rome
   and cultivates his garden in Corinth; in another he becomes king in
   Thrace; but in another, he goes to Rome and takes pow er. . . It will
   be noticed that this text is presented in a very complex and
    inextricable narration, even though it presumes to save the T ruth; it
    is first a dialogue between Valla and Antony, in which is inserted
   another dialogue between Sextus and the oracle of Apollo, then this
   is succeeded by a third dialogue, Sextus and Jupiter, which gives
   way to the Theodorus and Pallas discussion at the end of which
   Theodorus wakes up.
 6 Borges, ‘The garden with forking paths’, in Labyrinths, trans.
    Donald A. Yates, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970.
 7 cf. Alain Bergala, ‘Le vrai, le faux, le factice’, Cahiers du cinéma,
    no. 351, septembre 1983. He criticizes the ready-made formul­
    ations which follow from this new system of the image (and
    obviously every system of images has its imitations which appear
    very quickly). Bergala suggests a criterion: the film set must not
    remain lifeless, pretending to stand for itself, but must link up with
    a falsifying narration, which for its part is not arbitrary but has a
   justification. In relation to Welles, he entitled a block of images,
    ‘The powers of the false’ (Orson Welles, Cahiers du cinéma, p. 69). The
    reader is referred to an important article by Pascal Bonitzer, ‘L’art
    du faux: métamorphoses’ (Raoul Ruiz, Cahiers du cinéma).
 8 Melville’s novel, The Confidence man, has been translated by Henri
    Thomas with the title Le grand escroc, Editions de Minuit (the
    expression occurs in Melville). Godard's short film (1964) was part
    of a series making up Les plus belles escroqueries du monde. The
    breakdown of the cutting has been published in L'Avant-scène du
    cinéma, no. 46.
 9 Ishaghpour, D'une image à l'autre, p. 206.
10 As Régis Durand says, summarizing one of Melville’s narrative
    procedures, ‘someone repeats a story that he has got from another
    character, who, by way of justification, invokes the testimony of
    other characters who are no more than the first one variously
    disguised’. The man with the cap comes to cast doubt on the
    supposed disasters whose story he has heard; now these calamities

304                                                Notes to pp. 134—139
     are those which would have befallen a man who is none other than
     himself in another disguise, and whose story has been passed on by
     another individual who is also a version of himself. (Melville, signes et
     métaphores, Age d’homme, pp. 129—30.)
11 For instance, in Robbe-Grillet, it is the erotic scenes which play the
     role of descriptions, tending to immobility (tying up, chaining the
     woman), whilst the narration passes through every means of
     transport as sources of false movement.
12 It is on this point that the followers of Christian Metz have
     introduced important semiological changes concerning ‘modern
     cinema’; on dysnarrative in Robbe-Grillet (who created the word),
     cf. Chateau and Jost, Nouveau cinéma nouvelle sémiologie, and
     Gardies, Le cinéma de Robbe-Grillet. The reader is also referred, in
     relation to Resnais, to the book on Muriel, Galilée (M. Marie,
     M.-C. Ropars and C. Baiblé).
13 . In most interviews with Welles, the critique of the notion of truth
     comes back to the impossibility of judging man and life. cf. Jean Gili,
     ‘Orson Welles ou le refus de juger’, Orson Welles, Etudes cinématogra­
     phiques.
14 T he collaboration between Lang and Brecht occurred in Hangmen
     Also Die, but was very ambiguous. For instance, at the beginning of
     the film, the question of knowing if the resistance fighters can
     legitimately compromise their compatriots is raised, because the
     Nazis detain and kill innocent hostages; the young girl begs the
     resistance fighter to give himself up in order to save her father who
     has been taken hostage. But a litde afterwards, and still to save her
     father, she does not hesitate in accepting the sacrifice of a woman
     shopkeeper who refuses to denounce her herself. There is a
     properly Brechtian process in this, where the viewer is made aware
     of a problem or a contradiction, and led to resolve them in his own
     way (distancing). What Lang is responsible for is a quite different
     process: the way in which someone betrays himself, but in such a
     way that the appearance will be contrasted with other appearances
     in a different connection (not only the informer who inadvertently
     ‘gives himself away’, but also the resistance fighter who has put
     traces of red on his lips, this time too perfecdy, to give the
     impression of a Iove-scene). The two processes may intermingle and
     converge towards a similar effect, but they are very distant from
     each other.
15* Translators’ note: Twilight of the Idols, trans. R. J. Hollingdale,
     Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968, p. 41.
16 On body-forces, cf. Petr Krai, ‘Le film comme labyrinthe’, Positif,
     no. 256, juin 1982, and Jean Narboni, ‘Un cinéma en plongée’,
     Orson Welles, Cahiers du cinéma (Narboni compares ‘character’
     according to Welles and the Nietzschean will to power).
17 Interview with Welles, Cahiers du cinéma, p. 42: about the batde in
     Falstaff. Similarly the cut-up montage of the characters in The Lady
    from Shanghai is suggestive for Didier Goldschmidt: the shots do not

Notes to pp. 139—145                                                    305
   link up, ‘they rush at each other, the series of cross-cuttings in
   extreme close-up, especially of O’Hara and Grisby, tip the weight of
   the image from left to right; movements are brusquely interrupted;
   everything contributes to the freeing of an energy which conditions
   an almost exclusively plastic perception of the film’ (Cinématographe,
   no. 75, février 1982, p. 64).
18 cf. Robin Wood’s detailed analyses of Touch of Evil (Positif, no. 167,
   mars 1975): Vargas and Quinlan, ‘each of the two men dominates
   the frame in turn, or both occupy the image in an ephemeral and
   precarious equilibrium’.
19 On the ‘impotence’ of Welles’s characters, as ‘price to pay for
   exercising the power of voice and script’, cf. Michel Chion, Orson
    Welles, Cahiers du cinéma, p. 93. Similarly, Lago’s assumed sexual
    impotence is not a motive or explanation but refers at a deeper level
    to a certain state or quality of life (Marienstras, ‘Orson Welles
    interprète et continuateur de Shakespeare’, Positif, no. 167).
20 cf. the interview, in Bazin, Orson Welles, Ed. du Cerf, p. 178. The
    frog is the truthful animal because it believes in pacts and contracts.
    But, in practice, there are only fluctuating ‘partners’ (‘You talk as if
    there was a kind of contract between us, but there isn’t, we are
    partners here’, Touch of Evil). It is true that Welles begins by saying
    that it is better to make judgem ents in the name of higher values
   rather than ‘on one’s own authority’ (p. 154). But, a little further on,
    he says that each is as dreadful as the other (p. 160).
21 This is the problem which dominates the Bazin interview. Welles is
    happy to acknowledge the ‘ambiguity’ of his position: he does not
    have the same clarity as Nietzsche, even though he is preoccupied
    with the same theme, that of an ‘aristocratic morality.’
22 Welles makes some lyrical declarations about Falstaffs vital good­
    ness: ‘He is goodness; he is the character in whom I believe the
    m ost. . . his goodness is like the bread and the wine’ (interview,
    Cahiers du cinéma, p. 41 ; and also Marienstras, op. cit., p. 43).
23 On all these subjects, cf. Michel Serres, Le système de Leibniz, PUF, I,
    pp. 151-74,11, pp. 648-67.
24 Charles Tesson (Cahiers du cinéma) analyses depth of field as a factor
    of disequilibrium, ‘off-balance’: it is as if a scorpion were filmed
    head on, ‘the important thing is not in front but at the back’, to the
    extent that the image must ‘topple over towards a pure clair­
    voyance’. There is an effect of toppling over in the sequence shot as
    well as in short montage.
25 Among Welles’s projects is The Dreamers, inspired by Isak Dinesen : a
    classical singer who has lost her voice after a painful love affair finds
    a small boy in the village choir who has exacdy the same voice; she
    gives him lessons, so that the world hears her voice again for three
    years; a highly erotic relation is formed between the two which
    pushes the boy to revenge . . . It is a story of traitors and forgers, in
    the Welles fashion, but also inevitably of vanishing of the person.
    Isak Dinesen made the heroine say, more or less in the same terms

306                                              Notes to pp. 145—148
   as Virginia Woolf: ‘I will no longer be a person, Marcus, from now
   on I will always be several.’ Welles declares that he shot this scene as
   one of the raisons d'être of the film (interview, Cahiers du cinéma,
   pp. 49 and 58).
26 We follow more or less closely the essential article by Gérard
   Legrand on It’s All True (Positif, no. 167). But Legrand sees a
   contradiction between ‘will to power’ and ‘report of illusion’. We see
   none, will to power being life as power of the false.
27 The great theory of forgers according to Nietzsche appears in Book
   IV of Zarathustra: we find there the man of state, the man of
   religion, the man of morality, the man of science . . . A power of the
   false corresponds to each one; they are thus inseparable from each
   other. And ‘the truthful man’ was himself the first power of the
   false, who develops through the others. The artist in turn is a
   forger, but this is ¿he ultimate power of the false, because he wants
   metamorphosis instead of ‘taking on’ a form (form of the True, of
   the Good, etc.). Will or will to power thus has two extreme degrees,
   two polar states of life, on one hand will-to-take-over or will-to-
   dominate, on the other hand the will which is identical to becoming
   and metamorphosis, ‘bestowing virtue’. Nietzsche will be able to call
   himself creator of truth, from the second point of view, while wholly
   maintaining his critique of the True. An equally strong opposition
   between form and metamorphosis, ‘form’ and ‘shape’, will be found
   in Melville (notably in Pierre; or the ambiguities; cf. Jaworski’s
   commentary, ‘Le désert et l’empire’, thesis, University of Paris VII,
   pp. 566-8).
28 A very clear presentation of these basic conditions will be found in
   certain authors, all the clearer in that these authors propose to go
   beyond them. Thus Beckett, on Film, says that one must distinguish
   what the camera OE sees from what the character O sees, ‘the
   perception by OE in the bedroom and the perception by O of the
   bedroom’: ‘it is better to avoid the double shot, the superimposition,
   and to underline the qualitative distinction between the two kinds of
   images, as far as the final identification of OE and O’ (Translators’
   note; see Volume I, p. 228) (Comédies et actes divers. Editions du
   Minuit, p. 130). Similarly, Godard, in relation to Two or Three Things
   I Know about Her, calls what the camera sees object, what the
   character sees subject, and adds up the two, 1+ 2= 3 to arrive at the
   final identity, 1+ 2+3= 4, life (Jean-Luc Godard parJean-Luc Godard,
   pp. 393—6). Similarly, Pasolini distinguishes the double nature of
   cinema, as much from the point of view of the character as of the
    film-maker himself: cinema is ‘simultaneously extremely subjective
   and extremely objective’, the two elements remaining indissociable
    to the point of identification (L’expérience hérétique, Payot, p. 142).
29 On this point, see Reynold Humphries’s detailed analyses, Fritz
   Lang américain, Albatros, notably chs III and IV: on going beyond
    the objective and subjective, and the crisis of identity (‘centrality of
    vision and of the gaze and confused identities’, p. 99).

Notes to pp. 149—154                                                  307
30 Pasolini, L'expérience hérétique, pp. 147—54: ‘pseudo-stories written
    in the language of poetry’. This new cinema of poetry (about 1960,
    according to Pasolini) devotes itself to ‘making the camera felt’;
    whilst the old cinema of prose could achieve the greatest poetry of
    content, it none the less remained linked to a classical story where
    the camera was allowed to be strictly forgotten (one wonders if this is
    a sufficient criteria even so, and where Pasolini would locate authors
    like Eisenstein or Gance . . .).
31 On the critique of truth and veneration; on the function of
    story-telling and the m anner in which it goes beyond the real and
    the fictional; and on the role and the justification for ‘intercessors’:
    the most important text is Perrault’s interview with René Allio, in
   Ecritures de Pierre Perrault, Edilig, pp. 54—6. To this may be added, in
    the same volume, all of Jean-Daniel Lafond’s analysis, ‘L’ombre
    d’un doute’, which portrays the cinema of Perrault as an art of the
    ‘feint’: the characters ‘are fictional without being even so beings of
    fiction’ (pp. 72—3).
32 cf. Jean-André Fieschi’s analysis, which shows how, beginning with
    Les maîtres fous, Rouch makes ‘the already troubling dislocation
    which seemed the film’s message’ undergo ‘a second dislocation’.
    And, increasingly, ‘what Rouch films, and is the first to do so, is no
    longer behaviour or dreams, or subjective discourses, but the
    indiscernible mixture which links one to the other’ (in Cinéma,
    théorie, lectures, pp. 259—61).
33 Jean-Luc Godard, p. 220.
34 Pasolini forcefully emphasized that the free indirect story implied,
    in literature, different ‘languages’ depending on what social group
    the characters belonged to. But, oddly, this condition did not seem
    to him to be realizable in the cinema, where the visual data always
    introduced a certain tendency to uniformity: if characters ‘belong to
    a different social world, they are mythified and assimilated into the
    categories of anomaly, neurosis or hypersensitivity’ (pp. 146—7,
     155). Apparently Pasolini did not see how direct cinema offered a
    quite different response to this problem of the story.
35 cf. Shirley Clarke, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 205, octobre 1968 (‘a
    certain time is required for the character to seize hold of your
    expectation . . .’, p. 25).
36 On Faces, cf. Jean-Louis Comolli, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 205, p. 38:
    on the frontier, the impossibility of determining it, and maintaining
    a ‘reserved zone’.
37 Godard, Introduction à une véritable histoire du cinéma. Albatros,
    p. 168, (and p. 262: ‘I have always tried for what is called docu­
    mentary and what is called fiction to be for me the two aspects of a
    single movement, and it is their connection which produces the true
    movement’).
38 Godard in Le Monde, 27 mai 1982, on Passion. And, in relation to
    First Name Carmen, he will remind us that the first name is precisely
    what is before: we must get to the character before he is captured in

308                                               Notes to pp. 154—160
    myth or legend, and, on Christ, ‘What did Joseph and Mary say to
    each other before having the child?’ (Lecture at the Venice Festival,
    September 1983).
39 In a fine story (Le baron Bagge, Ed. du Sorbier), Lennet-Holenia
    assumes that death does not occur in a moment, but in a space-time
    located ‘between the moment itself, which may last several days. A
    conception of death quite close to this appears in Godard’s films.

7 Thought and Cinema
 1 Elie Faure, Fonction du cinéma, Médiations, p. 56: ‘It is in fact its
   material automatism which gives rise inside these images to this new
   universe which it gradually imposes on our intellectual automatism.
   Thus there appears, in a blinding light, the subordination of the
   human soul to the tools which it creates, and vice versa. It turns out
   that there is a constant reversibility between technical and affective
   nature.’ Similarly for Epstein, the automatism of the image or the
   mechanism of the camera have as correlate an ‘automatic subjec­
   tivity’, able to transform and go beyond the real: Ecrits sur le cinéma,
   Seghers, II, p. 63.
 2 cf. Martin Heidegger, What Is Called Thinking?, trans. Fred D. Wieck
   and J. Glenn Gray, New York; H arper & Row, p. 3.
 3 Elie Faure nevertheless retains a hope founded on automatism
   itself: ‘true friends of the cinema have only seen in it a worthy
   instrument of propaganda. Maybe. The pharisees of politics, art,
   letters and science itself will find in the cinema the most faithful of
   servants until the day when, through a mechanical reversal of roles,
   it will enslave them in turn’ (op. cit., p. 51, a piece from 1934).
 4 All these themes are analysed in Eisenstein, Film Form, notably in the
   chapters, ‘The principle of cinema and Japanese culture’, ‘The
   fourth dimension of cinema’, ‘Methods of montage 1929’, and
   especially in the 1935 speech, ‘Film form: new problems’.
 5 cf. ‘La centrifugeuse et le Graal’, La non-indifférente Nature, Paris:
   UGE, Volume I.
 6 Epstein, passim. He often emphasizes metaphor (it is from him that
   we take the following example, after Apollinaire, ‘The hands
   flutter’, I, p. 68).
 7 cf. the interview with Jakobson, which introduces many details in
   this regard: Cinéma, théories, lectures. Jean Mitry, on his part, suggests
   a complex notion: cinema would not proceed by metaphor, but by
   ‘metaphoric expression based on a metonymy’ (Cinématographe,
   no. 83, novembre 1982, p. 71).
 8 Bonitzer, ‘Voici’, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 273, janvier 1977. Gance and
   L'Herbier lay equal claim to a metaphorical montage: the scene of
   the Convention and the storm, in Napoleon, the scene of the Stock
    Market and the sky, in Money. With Gance, the technique of

Notes to pp. 160—164                                                     309
     superimpositions which go beyond the possibilities of perception
     serves to constitute the harmonics of the image.
 9    Eisenstein admires Tolstoy (and Zola) for having known how to
     compose the image so as to integrate into it the way in which the
     characters themselves feel and think, and in which the author thinks
     of them: thus the ‘criminal’ embraces of Anna Karenina and
     Vronsky. This time, the ‘compositional principle’ is no longer
     expressed in an image in echo (a sad nature, a sad light, a sad music
     for a sad h ero . . .), but is expressed direcdy in the image: Eisenstein,
     Film Form, pp. 155-60. Eisenstein himself, however, does not
     appear to have achieved images of this kind. He rather proceeds by
     the first means, resonance or echo. Likewise Renoir, in La bête
     humaine, or in Partie de campagne. L’Herbier, by contrast, achieves an
     intrinsic composition with the amazing images of rape in L’homme du
     large-, rape as murder.
10   Bazin, What Is Cinema?, Vol. I, pp. 100—7.
11   Eisenstein, La non-indifférente Nature, II, pp. 67—9.
12   The theatre and opera came up against the problem: how to avoid
     reducing the crowd to an anonymous, solid mass, but also to a
     collection of individual atoms? Piscator, in the theatre, gave crowds
     an architectural or geometric treatment which would be taken up by
     expressionist cinema, especially Fritz Lang: as in the rectangular,
     triangular, or pyramidal arrangements in Metropolis, but it is a
     crowd of slaves, cf. Lotte Eiiner, L'écran démoniaque. Encyclopédie
     du cinéma, pp. 119—24. Debussy claimed more for opera: he
     wanted the sound to be a focus of physical and moving individu­
     ations, irreducible to those of its members (Barraqué, Debussy, Paris:
     Seuil, p. 159). This is what Eisenstein realizes in cinema; its
     condition is that the masses become subject.
13   Eisenstein, ‘Dickens, Griffith and us’ (Film Form). He criticizes
     Griffith for not achieving a truly dialectical ‘monism’.
14   Bonitzer presents a broad Hitchcock—Eisenstein comparison no­
     tably in view of the close-up: Le champ aveugle, Cahiers du
     cinéma/Gallimard.
15   Serge Daney, La rampe, p. 172.
16   Paul Virilio shows how the system of war mobilizes perception as
     much as arms and actions: thus photo and cinema pass through war,
     and are coupled together with arms (for example, the machine-
     gun). There will increasingly be a mise-en-scène of the batdefield, to
     which the enemy replies, not now by camouflage, but by a
     counler-mise-en-scène (simulations, trickery, or giant illuminations
     of the air defence). But it is the whole of civil life which passes into
     the mode of the mise-en-scène, in the fascist system: ‘real power is
     henceforth shared between the logisdcs of arms and that of images
     and sounds’; and, to the very end, Goebbels dreamt of going beyond
     Hollywood, which was the modern cinema-city in contrast to the
     ancient theatre-city. Cinema in turn goes beyond itself towards the
     electronic image, civil as well as military in a military-industrial

310                                                Notes to pp. 164—167
   complex, cf. Guerre et cinéma I, Logistique de ta perception, Cahiers du
   cinéma/Editions de l’Etoile.
17 Artaud, ‘La vieillesse précoce du cinéma’, [‘Old age of the cinema’],
   Oeuvres complètes, Gallimard, III, p. 99 (this piece marks Artaud’s
   break with cinema, 1933).
18 All these themes are developed in Vol. Ill of Artaud. In regard to
   the only screenplay of La coquille et le clergyman, that was produced
   (by Germaine Dulac), Artaud says (p. 77) that the specificity of
   cinema is vibration as ‘hidden birth of thought’; it ‘can resemble and
   ally itself with the mechanics of a dream without really being itself a
   dream’; it is ‘the pure work of thought'. Artaud’s attitude in relation
   to Germaine Dulac’s writing raises many questions which have been
   analysed by O. and A. Virmaux, Les surréalistes et le cinéma, Seghers.
   Artaud would constantly point out that this is the first surrealist
   film, and would reproach Bunuel and Cocteau for restricting
   themselves to the arbitrariness of dream (pp. 270—2). It seems that
   what he likewise criticized Germaine Dulac for was having already
   pulled La coquille et le clergyman in the direction of a simple dream.
19 It is in this sense that the philosophic tradition (Spinoza, Leibniz)
   takes up the spiritual automaton; and also Valéry in M. Teste.
   Jacques Rivière compares Artaud to Valéry, but this is one of the
   numerous misinterpretations he makes, in the famous correspond­
   ence (Vol. I). Kuriichi Uno has ably shown the radical contrast
   between Valéry and Artaud in relation to the spiritual automaton:
   ‘Artaud et l’espace des forces’, thesis, University of Paris VIII,
   pp. 15-26.
20 Véronique Tacquin has made a profound study of Dreyer’s cinema,
   pointing to what she calls the Mummy (‘Pour une théorie du
   pathétique cinématographique’, thesis, University of Paris VIII).
   She does not refer to Artaud, but to Maurice Blanchot, who is close
   to him. Artaud had already introduced the Mummy in some
   passages of Bilboquet (I). Véronique Tacquin’s analyses open up a
   whole cinematographic development of the Mummy theme.
21 ‘Sexuality, repression and the unconscious have never seemed to
   me a sufficient explanation of inspiration or of the sp irit. . . ’ (III,
   p. 47).
22 Maurice Blanchot, ‘Artaud’, Le livre à venir, Gallimard, p. 59:
   Artaud inverts ‘the terms of movement’; he puts in'first place
   ‘dispossession, and not the totality of which this dispossession at first
   appeared as simple lack. What comes first is not the fullness of being,
   but the crack and the fissure
23 cf. Heidegger, op. cit., pp. 4—6. 'Most thought-provoking is that we are
   still not thinking — not even yet, although the state of the world is
    becoming constantly more thought-provoking . . . Most thought-
   provoking in our thought-provoking time is that we are still not thinking.'
24 Jean-Louis Schefer, L’homme ordinaire du cinéma, Cahiers du cinéma/
    Gallimard, pp. 113-23.
25 Artaud, Oeuvres complètes. Volume III, pp. 22, 76.

Notes to pp. 169—173                                                    311
26 Drouzy gives a narrowly psychoanalytic interpretation of Dreyer’s
   problems: Carl Th. Dreyer né Nilsson, Ed. du Cerf, pp. 266—7 1.
27 Rossellini, interview, in La politique des auteurs, Cahiers du cinéma/
   Editions de l’Etoile, pp. 65—8.
28 The reader is referred to the book by Agel and Ayfre, Le cinéma et le
   sacré, Ed. du Cerf, and to the studies on La passion du Christ comme
   thème cinématographique, (Etudes cinématographiques).
29 cf. Jean Collet, Jean-Luc Godard, Seghers, pp. 26—7.
30 In the history of philosophy, the substitution of belief for know­
   ledge takes place in authors of whom some are still believers, while
   others carry out an atheistic conversion. Hence the existence of real
   couples: Pascal-Hume, Kant—Fichte, Kierkegaard-Nietzsche, Le-
   quier—Renouvier. But, even with the believers, belief is not now
   directed towards another world, it is directed to this world: faith
   according to Kierkegaard, or even Pascal, restores man and the
   world to us.
31 cf. Claude Beylie’s excellent analysis in Procès deJeanne d'Arc (Eludes
   cinématographiques).
32 Serge Daney, p. 80: ‘To what the other says, assertion, declaration,
   sermon, Godard always replies with what another other says. There
   is always a great unknown in his pedagogy, for the nature of the
   relation that it enjoys with good discourses (those he defends, Maoist
   discourse, for instance) is undecidable.’
33 Alain Bergala: ‘Les ailes d’Icare’, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 355, janvier
    1984, p. 8.
34 Daney shows that, because of the status of discourses in Godard, the
   only ‘good’ discourse is the one that can be given or restored to the
   body: this is the whole story of Ici et ailleurs. Hence the necessity to
   reach things and beings 'before they are named’, before all
   discourse, so that they can produce their own: cf. Venice press
   conference, on First Name Carmen, in Cinématographe, no. 95, décem­
   bre 1983 (and also Louis Audibert’s commentaries, p. 10: ‘There is a
   great freedom in this film which is that of a belief. . . The traces of
   the world captured in the filmic canvas, offered as a kind of speech,
   evangelical. . . Finding the world again implies returning this side
   of codes. . . ’).
35 Alexandre Astruc, in Pierre Lherminier’s L’art du cinéma, Seghers,
   p. 589: ‘The expression of thought is cinema’s fundamental
   problem.’
36 Artaud, Oeuvres complètes. Vol. Ill, p. 76.
37 The theme of the Outside, and its relation to thought, is one of
   Blanchot’s most consistent subjects (notably in L ’entretien infini). In a
   homage to Blanchot, Michel Foucault takes up this ‘Thought of the
   outside’, giving it a more profound status than any internal
   foundation or principle: cf. Critique, juin 1966. It is in The Order of
   Things (trans. Alan Sheridan, London: Tavistock, 1970) that he
   analyses, for his own purposes, the relation between thought and an
   ‘unthought’ which is crucial to it: pp. 322-38.

312                                               Notes to pp. 174—177
38 Drawing on the literary notion o f‘focusing’ in Genette, François Jost
   distinguishes three possible types of ocularizing: internal, when the
   camera seems to be in the same place as a character’s eye; external,
   when it seems to come from outside or be autonomous; and ‘zero’,
   when it seems to be effaced in favour of what it is showing
   (Communications, no. 38). Resuming this question, Véronique
   Tacquin, op. cit., attaches a great deal of importance to zero-
   ocularizing: she makes it the characteristic of Dreyer’s last films, in so
   far as they embody the instance of the Neutral. For our part, we think
   that internal focusing does not just concern a character, but every
   centre existing in the image; it is, therefore, the case of the
   action-image in general. The two other cases are not precisely
   defined as the external and the zero, but apply when the centre has
   become purely optical, either because it moves into the light source
   (Welles’s depth), or because it moves into the point of view (Dreyer’s
   planitude).
39 Daney.op. cit., p. 174. The importance of Serge Daney’s book lies in
   the fact that it is one of the few to take up the question of
   cinema-thought relations, which were so common at the beginning
   of reflection on cinema, but later abandoned because of disenchant­
   ment. Daney restores the full weight to it, in relation to contemporary
   cinema. Jean-Louis Schefer does the same.
40 Everywhere in Rohmer, as in Kierkegaard, choice is posed in view of
   the ‘marriage’ which defines the ethical stage (Contes morawc). But
   below this there is the aesthetic stage, and beyond it the religious
   stage. The latter exhibits a grace, but one which is continually sliding
   into chance as uncertain point. This was already the case in Bresson.
   The special num ber of Cinématographe on Rohmer, no. 44, février
    1979, analyses this interpenetration of chance and grace very well: cf.
   articles by Carcassone, Jacques Fieschi, Hélène Bokanovski, and
   especially Devillers (‘It is also chance which is perhaps the secret
   subject of My Night with Maud : metaphysical chance weaves its enigma
   throughout the narration around Pascal’s wager, a theme already
   initiated by the shot of a work dealing with mathematical
   probabilities.. .Only Maud, who plays a game of chance, that is, that
   of the real choice, is exiled in a higher misfortune'). On thedifference
   between the completed series of Contes moraux and the series Comédies
   et proverbes, it seems to us that the tales still had a structure of short
   theorems, while the proverbs increasingly resemble problems.
41 cf. precisely Rohmer’s commentaries on Dreyer’s Ordet: Cahiers du
   cinéma, no. 55, janvier 1956. Véronique Tacquin writes: ‘Dreyer
   represses the external manifestations of the internal lived part of the
   role. . . Even in the most serious bodily affections of characters, we
   see neither verugo nor paroxysms. . .the character who has received
   the blows without showing it suddenly loses his consistency and
   collapses like a mass’ (Tacquin, op. cit.).
42 ‘The automatism of real life’, excluding thought, intention and
   feeling is one of the recurrent themes of Bresson’s Notes, trans.

Notes to pp. 177—183                                                   313
   Jonathan Griffin, London: Quartet, 1986, pp. 15,21-2,59,100. To
   see how this automatism crucially relates to an outside, cf. p. 22
   (‘Automatically inspired and inventive models'), pp. 53—4 (‘Causes
   are not in models’), p. 59 (‘a mechanism gives rise to the unknown’).
43 Before the new wave, Bresson brought this new style to perfection.
   Marie-Claire Ropars sees its most extreme expression in Au hasard.
   Balthazar: ‘Chosen as an image of chance, the picturesque thread is
   none the less insufficient as the basis of extreme dividing into pieces
   of the story; each of Balthazar's stays with a master itself appears
   broken into fragments each of which in its brevity seems to be
   snatched from the void only immediately to fall back into it . . . The
   function of [the fragmenting style] is to place a barrier between the
   viewer and the world, which transmits feelings but filters their
   background.’ This is the break with the world specific to modern
   cinema, cf. L’écran de la mémoire. Seuil, pp. 178—80.
44 Maurice Blanchot, L’entretien infini, pp. 65, 107—9.
45 On the critique of the notion of ‘voice-off, cf. Chateau and Jost,
   Nouveau cinéma, nouvelle sémiologie, p. 31 ff. On the notion o f‘sound
   frame’, cf. Dominique Villain, L'oeil à la caméra. Cahiers du
   cinéma/Editions de l’Etoile, ch. 4.
46 Albert Spaier has clearly distinguished the two kinds of arithmetical
   cut in the theory of the continuous: ‘What characterizes all
   arithmetical cuts is the redistribution of the sets of rational numbers
   into a lower class and a higher class, that is, into two collections such
   that any term in the first is smaller than any term in the second. Now
   each num ber likewise determines such a redistribution. T he only
   difference is that the rational number must always be included either
   in the lower class or in the higher class of the cut, whilst no irrational
   number forms part of either of the two classes which it separates’ (La
   pensée et la quantité, Alcan, p. 158).
47 Chateau and Jost have analysed Robbe-Grillet’s cinema as serial
   using different criteria from those proposed by us, ch. 7. Robbe-
   Grillet had carried out a whole critique of metaphor from a
    novelistic perspective, exposing the pseudo-unity of man and
    nature, or the pseudo-link between man and the world: ‘Nature,
    humanism, tragedy’, Snapshots, or Towards a New Novel.
48 Automata or ‘models’ according to Bresson are not at all a creation
   of the author: in contrast to the role of the actor, they have a
   ‘nature’, an ‘I’, which reacts on the author (‘They allowing you to act
    in them, and you allowing them to act in you’, p. 23). Bresson’s
   cinema, or, in a different way, Rohmer’s is evidently the opposite of
   direct cinema; but it is an alternative to direct cinema.
49 In two crucial pages of L’expérience hérétique, pp. 146—7, Pasolini
    moves, with plenty of precautions, from the idea of internal
    monologue to that of free indirect discourse. We saw in the first
   volume that free indirect discourse was a constant theme of
    Pasolini’s, in his literary but also cinematographic reflection: what
    he calls ‘the free indirect subjective’.

314                                               Notes to pp. 183—191
50 This goes for the genre of cinema itself. In regard to Numéro deux,
   Daney says: ‘Cinema’s sole specificity is that of collecting images
   which are no longer made for it’, photo or television (p. 83).
51 Barthélémy Amengual, in Jean-Luc Godard (Etudes cinématogra­
   phiques]), pp. 117—18: ‘There, dance is only accident, or, if you like,
   only a moment in the heroes’behaviour. . . [Cukor’s] Girls dance for
    the viewer. Angelo, Emile and Alfred dance for themselves, the
    time needed for their plots . . . While the rhythm of dance aims to
   set up an imaginary temporality on the stage, Godard’s cutting
    never for a moment removes the characters from a concrete time.
    Hence the constantly derisory aspect of their agitation.’
52 Bouligand, Le déclin des absolus mathématico-logiques, Ed. de L’Enseig­
    nement supérieur.
53 On Godard’s graphie forms, cf. Jacques Fieschi, ‘Words in images’,
    Cinématographe, no. 21, octobre 1976: ‘In the great silent mystery,
    the phrase in the intertitle arrived to secure the sense. In Godard,
    this written sense is brought into question and inflected with a new
    interference.’
54 cf. Jean-Claude Bonnet, ‘Le petit théâtre de Jean-Luc Godard’,
    Cinématographe, no. 41, novembre 1978. It is not a question in
    Godard’s case of introducing a play or rehearsals into a film
    (Rivette); for him theatre is inseparable from an improvisation, a
    ‘spontaneous mise-en-scène' or a ‘theatricalization of the everyday’.
    Similarly for dance, cf. the above remarks of Amengual.
55 Godard, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 146, août 1963.
56 Bakhtin, before Pasolini, is the best theorist of free indirect
    discourse: see V. N. Volosinov, Marxism and the Philosophy of
   Language, trans. Ladislav Matejka and O. R. Titunik, London:
    Harvard University Press, 1973. On ‘plurilingualism’ and the role
    of genres in the novel, cf. Esthétique et théorie du roman, Gallimard,
    p. 122 ff.

8 Cinema, Body and Brain, Thought
 1 This is the neo-realism ‘without a bicycle’ invented by Antonioni: cf.
   the texts quoted by Leprohon, Antonioni, Seghers, pp. 103, 105,
    110. Everything that Blanchot says about tiredness and waiting is
   particularly applicable to Antonioni (L’entretien infini, Preface).
 2 On all these aspects of Bene’s cinema, cf. the comprehensive
   analysis by Jean-Paul Manganaro, in Lumière du cinéma, no. 9,
   novembre 1977.
 3 Dominique Noguez stresses real time and the elimination of
   narrativity (‘m irror of time . . . relation to time which goes beyond
   the story’): in Le cinéma en l’an 2000, Revue d’esthétique, Privât, p. 15.
 4 On the ceremonial pole of experimental cinema, cf. Paolo Bertetto,
   ‘L’éidétique et le cérémonial’, ibid., pp. 59-61.

Notes to pp. 192—196                                                       315
 5 Brecht, 'Music and gest’, Brecht on Theatre: the development of an
   aesthetic, trans. John Willett, London: Eyre Methuen, 1978. Roland
   Barthes gave an excellent commentary on this piece (‘Diderot,
   Brecht, Eisenstein’, in Image-Music-Texl, trans. Stephen Heath,
   London: Fontana, 1977, pp. 69-78): the subject of Mother Courage
   may be the Thirty Years War, or the repudiation of war in general,
   but ‘its gest is not there’, but ‘in the blindness of the tradeswoman
   who thinks herself able to live off war, only, in fact, to die of it’ (ibid.,
    p. 76); it is in ‘the critical demonstration of the gesture’ or ‘the
   co-ordination of gestures’. It is not a ceremony (empty gest), said
    Brecht, but rather a ceremonializing o f‘the most current, the most
   vulgar and the most banal’ attitudes. Barthes clarifies the point: it is
    the gesture with which the canteen-woman checks the genuineness
   of the money offered, in Brecht, or, in Eisenstein, ‘the excessive
    flourish with which the bureaucrat in The General Line signs his
   official papers’, (ibid., p. 74).
 6 Comolli, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 205, octobre 1968 (cf. Sylvie Pierre’s
   commentary). Cassavetes himself says that life is not enough: a
   ‘spectacle’ is needed, for only the spectacle is creation; but the
   spectacle must come from living characters, and not vice versa.
 7 Yann Lardeau has clearly demonstrated the relation between the
    new wave and burlesque: ‘The relation of the body to the objects
   which surround it on stage produces a series of obstacles which the
   actor’s route comes successively up against’, and ‘becomes the raw
    material of cinematographic language’. He says, of First Name
    Carmen-, ‘the repeated collisions of the a-synchronic bodies pro­
    pelled towards one another like meteors’ (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 355,
   janvier 1984).
 8 The very title of Brecht’s piece, ‘Music and gest’, is enough to
   indicate that the gest must not be only social: being the principal
   element of theatricalization, it involves all aesthetic components,
    notably musical ones.
 9 cf. two important articles by Jean-Pierre Bamberger, one on Slow
   Motion, the other on First Name Carmen (Libération, 7 and 8 novembre
    1980, 19 janvier 1984). In the first, Bamberger analyses the
   breaking down [décomposition] of movement according to attitudes,
   but also the composition of melodic lines according to characters,
   and the corresponding role of music. Iii the second, he analyses the
    relation between the body and sound, but also between the musical
    gesture and the body’s attitude: ‘How is a relation between the
    pluckings of violin-strings and those of embracing bodies, between
    the bow’s curve of movement as it goes for the string and the arm
    which entwines a neck, to be brought into existence?’
10 Or rather it is Alain Philippon who asks Akerman about the limit of
    her stylization of bodies and postures. To which she replies that,
    from the beginning, she had a technical mastery which was too
    perfect, notably in framing. This mastery is not necessarily good:
    how is the ‘seriousness’ of stylization to be avoided? Philippon

316                                                 Notes to pp. 196—201
   analyses Akerman’s evolution in Toute une nuit: cf. Cahiers du
   cinéma, no. 341, novembre 1981, pp. 19—26.
11 Serge Daney, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 306, décembre 1979, p. 40: ‘We
   can clearly see that a purely critical, demystifying approach would
   have failed, by reducing the festival to what it signifies or to those
   who use it, to its meaning or its function . . . The festival [had to be]
   criticized whilst still showing it in its entirety, in its opacity.’ And
   Eustache’s own text, ‘Pourquoi j ’ai refait la Rosière’.
12 Jean Narboni compares Faux-fuyants to Gombrowicz’s novel, La
   pornographie (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 353, novembre 1983, p. 53).
   For the novel, like the film, presents an adult protagonist who
   devotes himself to observing the attitudes of young people,
   attitudes which are at once innocent and imposed, and all the more
   ‘pornographic’ for that, and which lead to a catastrophe: ‘their
   hands above their heads touched involuntarily. And -they were
   instantly lowered, violendy. For some time they both looked
   fixedly at their joined hands. And abruptly they fell; it wasn’t clear
   which one had over-balanced the other, you would think that it
   was their hands which had tipped them over’ (La pornographie,
   Julliard, p. 157).
13 Jean Douchet (‘Le cinéma autophagique de Philippe Garrel’, in
   Garret composé par Gérard Courant, Studio 43). ‘Two sensations by
   which solitude reveals itself, cold and burning, Athanor, for in­
   stance, is a film about fire. La         cicatrice intérieure is a film about fire
   and ice .. . The idea of the hot, the burning, the feverish, the
   intense, reinforces the fundamental character of an icy universe.'
14 Noël Burch, Praxis du cinéma, Gallimard, pp. 85—6.
15 cf. Alain Philippon (in Garrel, Studio 43): ‘What is the subject of La
   cicatrice intérieure if not birth and creation? We are there in the
   world of before the world, in a past or a future, it matters little,
   undated . . . It is clearly a birth that we have just witnessed, and the
   Child, in various guises, will later be the carrier of the film’s fiction
   . . . If fire, earth and water are called together in La cicatrice
   intérieure as in the first moments of the universe, it is in the role of
   primary elements of a world to be born, to which speech is to give
   life.’ And Philippe Carcassonne, in a rather guarded article
   (Cinématographe, no. 87, mars 1983) cites Le bleu des origines (in
   black and white): ‘It is the colour of genesis, what precedes history
   and will assuredly survive it; it is the eschatological envelope, not
   only of cinema, but of any representation from which characters
   have their sources.’
16 Garrel sometimes alludes to his personal history which is mixed up
   with his work: ‘At the end of Le berceau de cristal there is the girl
   who commits suicide, and somewhere it’s as I said in Marie pour
   mémoire, let madness come quickly . . . until the day that it hit me.
   Until I find sanity again through cinema.’ (Cahiers du cinéma,
   no. 287, avril 1978.)
17 Bazin, What Is cinema?, Vol. I, pp. 95 ff.

Notes to pp. 202—209                                               317
18 Phillipon, ‘L’enfant-cinéma’, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 344, février
   1983, p. 29. And, on movement and the body in Garrel, cf. Jean
   Narboni, ‘Le lieu dit’, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 204, septembre 1968.
19 On this pre-hodological space, space before action, overlapping
   of perspectives and fluctuation of the soul, cf. Gibert Simondon,
   L’individu et sa genèse physico-biologique, PUF, pp. 233-4.
20 Neurosis is thus not the consequence of the modern world, but
   rather of our separation from this world, of our lack, of adapt­
   ation to this world (cf. Leprohon, op. cit., pp. 104—6). The brain,
   in contrast, is adequate to the modern world, including its possi­
   bilities of the expansion of electronic or chemical brains: an
   encounter occurs between the brain and colour, not that it is
   enough to paint the world, but because the treatment of colour is
   an important element in the awareness of the ‘new world’ (the
   colour-corrector, the electronic image . . .). In all these respects,
   Antonioni identifies Red Desert as a turning-point in his work: cf.
   ‘Entretien avec Antonioni par Jean-Luc Godard’, in La politique
   des auteurs. Cahiers du cinéma/Edidons de l’Etoile. A project of
   Antonioni, ‘Technically soft’, shows an exhausted man who is on
   his back dying and looking at ‘the sky which becomes ever bluer,
   this blue becoming pink’, Albatros).
21 The reader is referred to Michel Ciment’s essentia] analyses,
   especially of Space Odyssey, and The Shining, in his book Kubrick,
   Calmann-Lévy.
22 Bounoure, Alain Resnais, Seghers, p. 67 (on Toute la mémoire du
   monde: ‘Resnais activates a universe in the image of our brain.
   What happens in front of his lens is suddenly transformed, and
   from documentary reality we slide imperceptibly towards a
   different reality . . . a film set which has been turned round and
   which returns our own image. Thus the librarian . . . assumes the
   face of a nervous, neuronic messenger.1
23 cf. interview, cited by Benayoun, Alain Resnais arpenteur de l'imagi­
   naire, Stock, p. 177.
24 René Prédal, Alain Resnais, Etudes cinématographiques, ch. VIII, cf.
   Cayrol, ‘Pour un romanesque lazaréen, Corps étrangers, Paris:
   UGE.
25 Jean-Claude Bonnet, on L ’amour à mort, in Cinématographe,
   no. 103, octobre 1984, p. 40. Bonnet underlines the profession of
   the man and woman: archaeologist of the past, botanist of the
   future; if the man has gone through death from the inside, the
   woman is summoned by death from the outside. Ishaghpour said
   about Stavisky: ‘Telescoped together are a past which seizes a
   character, and a future conceived as constitution of his character
   and as machination which destroys him1 (D’une image à l'autre,
   p. 205).
26 Pauline Harvey, ‘La danse des atomes et des nébuleuses’, in Dix
   nouvelles humoristiques par dix auteurs québécois, Ed. Quinze.
27 Prédal, op. cit., pp. 22—3.

318                                               Notes to pp. 210—212
28 cf. The Resnais—Eisenstein parallel according to Ishagpour, op. cit.,
   pp. 190-1.
29 Bergson, MM, ch. III.
30 This is very clear in Jakobson (Langage enfantin et aphasie. Editions
   de Minuit), who recognizes the two axes while emphasizing the
   associative one. T he persistence of the cerebral model in Chomsky
   should also be studied. For the understanding of cinema, the
   question is inescapably raised in semiology inspired by linguistics:
   what is the implicit cerebral model underpinning the cinema-
   language relationship, for instance in Christian Metz? In the
   development of this semiology, François Jost seems to us most
   aware of the problem: his analyses imply a different cerebral model,
   although, to our knowledge, he has not dealt directly with this
   problem.
31 Gilbert Simondon has analysed these different points: how the
   process of integradon-differentiation refers to a relative distribution
   of organic internal and external environments [milieux]; how these,
   in turn, refer to ‘an absolute interiority and externality’, which
   appear in the topological structure of the brain (op. cit., pp. 260—5) :
   ‘the cortex cannot be adequately represented in a Euclidean way’).
32 (Translators’ note: in English in the original.) This is the problem of
   synapses and of electrical, or chemical, transmission from one
   reason to the other: cf. Jean-Pierre Changeux, L’homme neuronal,
   Fayard, pp. 108 ff. The discovery of synapses was enough in itself to
   shatter the idea of a continuous cerebral system, since it laid down
   irreducible points or cuts. But, in the case of synapses with electrical
   transmission, we think that the cut or point may be called ‘rational’,
   in accord with the mathematical analogy. In contrast, in the case of
   chemical synapses, the point is ‘irrational’; the cut is important in
    itself and belongs to neither of the two sets that it separates (in fact,
    in the synaptic gap, vesicles will release discontinuous amounts of
    transmitter substance or ‘quanta’). Hence the ever greater impor­
    tance of a factor of uncertainty, or rather half-uncertainty, in the
    neuronal transmission. Steven Rose has underlined this aspect of
   the problem: Le cerveau conscient. Seuil, pp. 84—9.
33 cf. Rosenstiehl and Petitot, ‘Automate asocial et systèmes acentrés’,
    Communications, no. 22, 1974.
34 On the flight of associations, the window and transparency-effects,
    and the efforts of the principal character who goes against the
    current, cf. Téchiné, interviews with Sainderichin and Tesson,
    Cahiers du cinéma, no. 333, mars 1981: in this perspective, the film set
    has a cerebral rather than physical function.
35 cf. ‘Entretien avec Jacques Fieschi’, Cinématographe, no. 31, octobre
     1977: ‘I think that cinema is an art of literature. . . My intention was
    to make literal everything that has a metaphorical role in the film’, as
    in the cone which is passed on in Les enfants du placard. In other
    words, ‘infinite interpretation’ is not achieved through m etaphor or
    associative linkage, but, as we shall see, through break in association,

Notes to pp. 213—214                                                    319
   and relinkage around the literal image. It is this method which
   brings Jacquot close to Kafka, and allowed his fine adaptation of an
   episode of America. In the history of cinema, the first films inspired
   by psychoanalysis in contrast worked through metaphor and
   association.
36 Andrei Bely, Petersburg (and Georges Nivat’s postscript to the
    French translation which analyses the conception of the ‘cerebral
    game’ in Bely). We borrow the expression ‘relinked dividing up'
    from Raymond Ruyer, who uses it to characterize the famous
   Markoff chains: these are distinguished from both determined
    linkages and chance distributions; they concern semi-accidental
    phenomena or mixtures of dependency and uncertainty {La genese
   desformes vivantes, Flammarion, ch. VII). Ruyer shows how Markoff
    chains intervene in life, in language, in society, in history, in
    literature. The example of Bely in this respect would be a
    particularly clear one. More generally, neuronal chains as we have
   just defined them, with their synapses and their irrational points,
   correspond to M arkoffs scheme: they are ‘partially dependent’
    successive draughts, semi-accidental linkages, that is, relinkages.
    The brain seems to us peculiarly subject to a Markovian interpreta­
    tion (between the neuronal sender and receiver, there are succes­
    sive, but non-independent, tugs or draughts).
37 The great piece by Eisenstein which examines Battleship Potemkin is
    not a case of applied theory: it is rather the point where practice and
    theory relaunch each other and find their concrete unity: La
    non-indifférente Nature, Vol. I, ‘The organic and the pathetic’,
    pp. 54—72. This text underlines two aspects: the necessity of
    commensurable relations between whole and parts
                               OA _ OB
                               OB OC n
   as formula of the spiral; the necessity for the points of distribution
   to be ‘rational’, and to comply with a connected formula of the
   golden section, the cut or caesura being the end of one part or the
   beginning of the other, depending on whether one begins ‘from
   one end of the film or the other’ (n=0.618). We are concerned here
   only with the most abstract aspect of Eisenstein’s commentary,
   which is, however, important for its very concrete bearing on the
   images of Battleship. And the practice of false continuity in his later
   films, for instance in Ivan the Terrible, does not call this structure into
   question.
38 Jean-Pierre Bamberger, on Godard’s Slow Motion: ‘In the framing
   are the different moments of shooting; the taking of one shot is the
   framing, the shooting of another shot is the deframing of one shot
   in relation to the framing of the following one, and the montage is
   the final reframing . . . Framing is no longer defining a space, but
   imprinting a tíme’ (Liberation, 8 novembre 1980).

320                                              Notes to pp. 215—223
39 O ur analysis is so summary that we can only give a few bibliogra­
   phical references. (1) On the first two ages, Jean Mitry, Le cinéma
   expérimental, Seghers, ch. V and ch. IX. (2) On the more recent
   period, Dominique Noguez, Eloge du cinéma expérimental. Centre
   Georges-Pompidou (where studies of the forerunner, McLaren,
   and of the American underground may be found), Trente ans de
   cinéma expérimental en France, Arcef (especially on lettrism, ‘ex­
   panded cinema’ and Maurice Lemaître), Une renaissance du cinéma,
   Klincksieck. cf. also the article by Bertetto already cited, ‘L’éidétique
   et le cérémonial’. On the procedures of blinking and loops in the
   American underground, cf. P. A. Sitney, 'Le film structurel’, in
   Cinéma, théorie, lectures.
40 For example on democracy, the community and the necessity of a
   ‘leader’ in King Vidor’s work, cf. Positif, no. 163, novembre 1974
   (articles by Michel Ciment and Michael Henry).
41 cf. Kafka, Journal, 25 December 1911 (and letter to Brod, June
    1921); Klee, On Modem Art, trans. Paul Findlay, London: Faber,
    1966, p. 55. (‘We have found parts, but not the whole. We still lack
   the ultimate power, for: the people are not with us. But we seek a
   people. We began over there in the Bauhaus. We began there with a
   community to which each of us gave what he had. More we cannot
   do.') Carmelo Bene has also said: ‘I make popular theatre. Ethnic.
   But it is the people who are missing’ (Dramaturgie, p. 113).
42 Roberto Schwarz and his definition of 'tropicalism', Les Temps
   modernes, no. 288, juillet 1970.
43 On Lino Brocka, his use of myth and his cinema of drives, cf.
   Cinématographe, no. 77, avril 1982 (especially the article by Jacques
   Fieschi, ‘Violences’).
44 On the critique of myth in Perrault, cf. Guy Gauthier, ‘Une écriture
   du réel’, and Suzanne Trudel, ‘La quête du royaume, trois hommes,
   trois paroles, un langage’, in Ecritures de Pierre Perrault, Edilig.
   Suzanne T rudel distinguishes three kinds of impasse, genealogical,
   ethnic and political (p. 63).
45 Jean-Louis Comolli, interview, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 333, mars
    1982.
46 Yann Lardeau, ‘Cinéma des racines, histoires du ghetto’, in Cahiers
   du cinéma, no. 340, octobre 1982.
47 cf. Serge Daney, La rampe. Cahiers du cinéma/Gallimard, pp. 118—
   23 (especially the character of the story-teller).
48 On Rocha’s critique of myth and the evolution of his work, cf.
   Barthélémy Amengual, Le cinéma nôvo brésilien, Etudes cinématogra­
   phiques, II (p. 57: ‘the counter-myth, as one says counter-fire’).
49 Ecritures de Pieire Perrault: on real characters, and the speech-act as
   story-telling function, ‘flagrant offence of making legemT, cf. the
   interview with René Allio (on La bête lumineuse, Perrault would say: ‘I
   recently came across an unsuspected country . . . Everything in this
   apparently quiet country is made into legend as soon as one dares to
   talk about it.’).

Notes to pp. 225-229                                                   321
9 The Components of the Image
 1 Louis Audibert, ‘L’ombre du son’, Cinématographe, no. 48, juillet
   1979, pp. 5-6. This review has devoted two important issues,
   numbers 47 and 48, to the problems of the silent film and the talkie.
 2 cf. Sylvie Trosa, no. 47, pp. 14—15: the silent image had an
   autonomous ‘materiality’ which filled it with meaning. According to
   Trosa, L’Herbier was one of the authors of the silent film who lost
   most with the talkie, despite all his literary taste: ‘the visual
   constructions’ which he had the secret of, and which ensured ‘the
   appropriateness of substance and expression’, of nature and
   culture, lose much of their function.
 3 It is in the name of the talkie, amongst other reasons, that the
   Stalinists criticize Eisenstein for having confused history with
   nature, as we saw in relation to the Soviet congress of 1935.
 4 cf. Benveniste’s distinction between the level of the ‘story’ which
   connects events, and that of the ‘speech’ which utters or reproduces
   words: Problèmes de linguistique générale, Gallimard, pp. 241—2 (and
   how speech passes into the indirect style).
 5 Balazs observed that sound ‘has no image’: cinema does not
   ‘represent’ it but ‘restores’ it (L’esprit du cinéma, Payot, p. 244).
   However, it ‘emerges from the centre of the visual image’, and its
   elements are distributed in terms of this image: cf. Michel Chion, La
   voix au cinéma. Cahiers du cinéma/Editions de l’Etoile, pp. 13—14. It
   is in this sense a component of the visual image.
 6 This interactionist sociology of communication appears in America
   with Park and Goffman, in connection with urban phenomena and
   the problems of information, of circulatiop^of information. Its
   precursors are Georg Simmel in Germany, and, in a less recognized
   way, Gabriel Tarde in France. Phenomena such as rumour,
   newspapers, conversation, and characters such as the socialite, the
   stroller, the drifter, the marginal, the adventurer feature promi­
   nently in it, because they pose the question of sociability rather than
   society. Isaac Joseph, who has made a big contribution to the
   exposition of this sociology in France, has written a fine book, Le
   passant considérable (Librairie des Méridiens), in which he studies in
   particular the ‘difficulties in interaction’. In its very modernity, this
   school seems to us to hold a place in sociology analogous to that of
   the American comedy in the talking cinema - this is clearly a very
   important place.
 7 Noël Burch, ‘De Mabuse à M: le travail de Fritz Lang’, in Cinéma,
   théorie, lectures, p. 235.
 8 Cicourel, La sociologie cognitive, PUF, quoted by Isaac Joseph (who
   discusses this notion.of‘problematic’, op. cit., p. 54).
 9 It will be asked whether cinema can achieve phenomena of
   interaction with its own means. But this can only be done in silent
   films which give up intertitles, and which proceed by aberrant
    movements. We saw this in Vertov’s Man with a Movie Camera, where

322                                                Notes to pp. 229—235
    the gap acts as differential of movements. O r equally in The Last
    Laugh, it is the ‘unleashed’ camera which makes certain interactions
    visible.
10 Jean Douchet, in ‘Cinéma américain’, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 150,
    décembre 1963, pp. 146—7.
11 Gérard Genette’s theory concerning the literary story underlines
    the difference between the questions: ‘Who is speaking?’ and ‘Who
    is seeing?’ (Figures, III, p. 203, and Nouveau discours du récit, Seuil).
    This is the inspiration behind François Jost’s ideas in Communi­
    cations, no. 38, 1983. Mankiewicz seems to us the best cinematogra­
     phic example.
12 F. Berthet, in ‘La conversation’, Communications, no. 30, 1979,
     p. 150.
13* Translators’ note: the French word 'mondanité', which literally
    means ‘worldliness’, is also used in the plural with the sense of
    ‘society life’ or 'small talk’.
14 Alejo Carpentier, quoted by Mitry {Esthétique et psychologie du cinéma,
     Ed. Universitaires, II, p. 102): ‘Conversation has a rhythm, a
     movement, an absence of sequence in the ideas, with, on the
     contrary, strange associations, curious reminders, which bear no
     resemblance to the dialogues that usually fill’ novels and plays.
15 Georg Simmel, ‘Sociologie de la sociabilité’, in Urbi, III, 1980 (cf. the
     way Simmel produces a definition of democracy from this).
16 Claire Parnet, in an unpublished piece, analyses the voice in
     American cinema, comedies and thrillers.
17 cf. Comolli, Cahiers du cinéma, nos 230 and 231, juin—juillet 1972.
18 Michel Chion, op. cit., pp. 36,44.
19 Alain Philippon, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 347, rçiaj 1983, p. 67.
20 Michel Chion, op. cit., p. 72. Bazin wrote a fine passage on the
     deforming of sound relationships: ‘Indistinct sound elements are
     few . . . on the contrary Tati’s whole shrewdness consists of
     destroying clarity by clarity’ (Qu’est-ce que le cinéma?, Ed. du Cerf,
     p. 46). And the interview with Tati about sound, Cahiers du cinéma,
     no. 303, septembre 1979.
21 Michel Fano, in Encyclopaedia Universalis, ‘Cinema (musique de)’.
     Fano’s conception clearly implies the active presence of the musi­
     cian on the editing-table, his involvement in all sound elements, a
     musical treatment of non-musical sounds. We shall see that this
     argument takes on its full range in a new conception of the image.
22 cf. Eisenstein, Pudovkin and Alexandroff, 1928 Manifesto, in
     Eisenstein, Film Form, Appendix A, pp. 257-9. Sylvie Trosa is right
     to attribute the manifesto’s ideas to Pudovkin in particular:
     Eisenstein, for his part, believes less in the virtues of the out-of-field
     and sound-off than in the possibility of ‘sound-in’ to raise the visual
     image to a new synthesis.
23 Bresson, Notes, pp. 50—2. It is clear that Bresson is not only thinking
     of sound-off: there may be a ‘preponderance’ of sound-in over the
     image itself, and, through this, ‘neutralization’ of the visual image.

Notes to pp. 235—239                                                 323
    On the sound space in Bresson, cf. Henri Agel, L'espace cinématogra­
   phique, Delarge, ch. VII.
24 According to Bonitzer's crucial text, ‘there are at least two types of
    voice-off: which refer to at least two types’ of out-of-field: one
   homogenous with the field, the other heterogeneous and enjoying
    an irreducible power (‘absolutely other and absolutely indeter­
    minate’). cf. Le regard, et la voix, Paris: UGE pp. 31—3. Michel Chion
    proposes the notion of 'acousmètre' to designate the voice whose
    source is not seen; and he distinguishes the reladve acousmètre and
    the ‘integral’ acousmètre, possessing the power of being ubiquitous,
    omnipotent and all-seeing. However, he relativizes Bonitzer’s
    distinction, because he wants to show how the two aspects have all
    kinds of connections, and enter into a circuit which does not,
    however, erase their difference in nature: pp. 26—9, 32.
25 cf. the analysis of Fusco’s music in The Eclipse, by Emmanuel
    Decaux, Cinématographe, no. 62, novembre 1980 (issue on film
    music).
26 Balazs, Le cinéma, Payot, p. 224: ‘The talking film represses pro­
    gramme music.’
27 Eisenstein, The Film Sense, London: Faber, 1943, pp. 114—56.
    Eisenstein thinks that internal correspondence can also apply to the
    immobile visual image: in this case it is the eye that constitutes the
    movement corresponding to musical movement (as in the waiting
    sequence before the attack). He draws a most important conse­
    quence from this: the visual image as such becomes readable ‘from
    left to right’, or sometimes in a more complex way: ‘plastic reading’
    (pp. 146—9). Thus Eisenstein is the inventor of the notion of
    readable image. Jean Mitry takes up the question, and devotes
    himself to a thorough study of the visual image/music correspond­
   ence: especially in Le cinéma expérimental, Seghers, chs V, IX and X.
    He begins by challenging all external correspondences, either
    because the image retains a spatial content which will work only as
    illustration of the music, or because the image, becoming formal or
    abstract, presents only arbitrary, reversible and decorative relations
    which do not really correspond to the musical relations (even in
    McLaren). He likewise challenges Eisenstein's readable image, and
    criticizes the waiting sequence, which remains, according to him, at
    a level of external correspondence (pp. 207-8). On the other hand,
    he thinks that the sequence with the battle on the ice is more
    appropriate because it tends to reveal a movement common to the
    visual and the musical. This is the condition of an internal
   correspondence, such as Honegger was looking for. But, according
    to Mitry, the common movement can only be achieved if the visual
    image is detached from bodies, without, however, becoming
    abstract or geometrical: the visual image must set in motion a
    matter, a materiality capable of vibrations and reflections. In this
    event there will be two corresponding expressions of a sjngle
    ‘univocal whole' (pp. 212—18). Eisenstein only half-achieved this in

324                                               Notes to pp. 239—243
    the battle on the ice, but Mitry thinks he has almost achieved it in his
    own attempts, in certain parts of Images pour Debussy. He willingly
    acknowledges, however, that it was under the conditions of an
    experimental film which had exclusively set itself this task.
28 Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, paras 5,16 and 17.
29 cf. ‘Table ronde sur la musique de film’, in Cinématographe, no. 62.
30 Adorno and Eisler, Musique de cinéma. Arche, p. 87. And in the
    example of the barcarolle, which would apply against Mitry and
    Eisenstein alike, cf. p. 75. Eisler was often Brecht’s collaborator (he
    is also the musician in Resnais’ Night and Fog). Even in a Marxist
    context, it goes without saying that conceptions of music reflect very
    different influences.
31 Balazs has produced a very fine cinematographic portrait of Greta
    Garbo (Le cinéma, p. 276): the specific feature in Greta Garbo’s
    beauty seems to him to come from the fact that she stands out from
    every environment, so as to express ‘the purity of someone
    imprisoned inside themself, the internal aristocracy, the shivering
    sensitivity of the noli me tangere'. Balazs does not mention Garbo’s
    voice, but that voice would confirm his analysis: it brings together
    the variation of an internal whole, beyond psychology, which the
    movements of the actress in her environment still did not express
    directly enough.
32* Translators’ note: in English in the original.
33 Michel Fano himself, in a very subtle piece (Cinématographe, p. 9),
    says that the two conceptions, his and Jansen’s, are equally
    legitimate. But we think that there is no need to choose and that
    each can be part of the other, at two different levels.
34 We have defined free indirect discourse as an enunciation forming
    part of an utterance which depends on a different subject of
    enunciation: for instance: ‘She collects her energy, she will'father
    suffer torture than lose her virginity.’ It is Bakhtin who shows that it
    is not a matter of a mixed form (Marxism and the Philosophy of
    Language, 3rd part).
35 cf. Eric Rohmer, ‘Film and the three levels of discourse, indirect,
    direct, hyperdirect’, Le goût de la beauté. Cahiers du cinéma/Editions
    de l’Etoile, pp. 96—9.
36 Michel Chion, p. 73: ‘The Bressonian model talks as one listens:
    picking up as he can in himself what he has just said, to the extent
    that he seems to conclude his speech as he goes along uttering it,
    without giving it the chance to resonate with the partner or the
    public . .. In Le diable probablement no voice is resonant any more.’
    (cf. Serge Daney, La rampe, pp. 135—43. In Four Nights of a Dreamer,
    the flashback takes on a special sense, because it allows the
    characters to talk all the more as if they were reporting their own
    words. It will be observed that Dostoevski already endowed his hero
    with a strange voice (‘I began as if I were reading in a book . . . when
    you speak they say that you are reading in a book’).
37 Marion Vidal, Les contes moraux d'Eric Rohmer, Lherminier,

Notes to pp. 243—246                                                     325
   pp. 126—8: in Claire's Knee, the narrator turns to the woman
   novelist; ‘if she allows Jerom e’s story, the latter will have won, he will
   have become a character in a novel, at least comparable to Valmont
   and Julien Sorel. This is the very principle of story-telling becoming
   reality [l’affabulation réalisante] which allows, through the magic of
   the verb, the embodiment of an impalpable and in practice
   non-existent reality.’ On what Rohmer calls ‘lie’ as cinematographic
   principle, cf. Le goût de la beauté, pp. 39—40.
38 Pasolini is even more important here because it is he who introduces
   the ‘free indirect’into cinema, as we have seen. For an analysis of the
   speech-act in Pasolini, sometimes act of tale, sometimes act of myth,
   cf. Pasolini, Etudes cinématographiques (on myth and the sacred, in The
   Gospel according to St Matthew, Oedipus Rex, Theorem, Medea, Volume
   I, articles by Maakaroun and Amengual; on the tale and story, in
   The Decameron, The Canterbury Tales, The Thousand and One Nights,
   Vol. II, articles by Sémolué and Amengual).
39 On this point, as on the cinema of Straub and Huillet as a whole,
   there are two essential texts, one by Narboni, and one by Daney
   (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 275, avril 1977, and no. 305, novembre
    1979). Jean Narboni emphasizes the buryings, lacunae or gaps, the
   visual image as ‘rock’, and what he calls ‘the places of memory’.
   Serge Daney entitles his piece ‘The Straubian shot’, and answers the
   question by saying ‘the shot as tomb' (‘the content of the shot is,
   then, stricto sensu what is concealed in it, the corpses under the
   ground’). It is not a matter of an ancient tomb, but of an archaeology
   of our time. Daney had already dealt with this theme in another
   piece entitled ‘A tomb for the eye’ (La rampe, pp. 70-7), where he
   observes in passing that there is in Straub a fragmentation of bodies
   which connects them to the earth, ‘discrete picking out of the most
   neutral and least spectacular parts of the body, here an ankle, there
   a knee’. This would be a reason, though minor, for confirming the
   comparison with Bresson and with Rohmer. To the texts of Narboni
   and Daney may be added that of Jean-Claude Biette, analysing the
   stratigraphie landscapes in Trop tôt, trop tard and the role of pan
   shots (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 332, février 1982).
40 cf. Daney, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 305, p. 6. And in Moses and Aaron,
   the interview between Straub and Huillet, and Bontemps, Bonitzer
   and Daney, no. 258, juillet 1975, p. 17.
41 Jean-Claude Bonnet, ‘Trois cinéastes du texte’, Cinématographe,
   no. 31, octobre 1977, p. 3 (it is Straub himself who spoke of telluric
   sequence and central fissure).
42 Narboni, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 275, p. 9. Pascal Bonitzer had
   spoken of ‘petrified and paralysing inscriptions’: ‘We are dealing
   with blocs, say Straub and Huillet . . . for instance the graffiti-
   dedication Für Holger Meins over a bloc of shots as epigraph for
   Moses and Aaron is what ended up as the most important thing in the
   film for the Straubs’. (Le régard et la voix, p. 67.)
43 O f course inscriptions in the image (letters, newspaper headlines),

326                                                Notes to pp. 246—250
   remained frequent in the first stage of the talkie; but they were
   usually delivered through the voice (for instance, the newspaper-
   seller’s voice). Inscriptions and intertides have their own impor­
   tance in modern cinema as in the silent, yet it is in a very different
   way: modern cinema carries out a ‘jamm ing’ of written meaning, as
   Jacques Fieschi shows, devoting to the question two articles which
   compare the modern and the silent, ‘Mots en images’ and ‘Cartons,
   chiffres et lettres’, Cinématographe, nos 21 and 32, octobre 1976 and
   novembre 1977.
44 The tectonic or geological power of the pictorial image in Cézanne
   is not one feature among others, but an overall characteristic
   transforming the whole, not only in the landscapes, a rock or a
   mountain outline, but also in the still lifes. It is a new system of visual
   sensation which contrasts equally with the dematerialized sensation
   of impressionism, and the projected, hallucinatory sensation of
   expressionism. It is the ‘materialized sensation’ cited by Straub with
   Cézanne as his reference: a film is not thought of as offering or
   producing sensations for the viewer, but as ‘materializing them’,
   achieving a tectonics of sensation, cf. ‘Entretien’, Cahiers du cinéma,
   no. 305, p. 19.
45 To our knowledge, it is Noël Burch who reinvents the notion of
   ‘reading’ of the visual image, by giving it an original meaning quite
   different from Eisenstein’s. He defines it as we saw in the earlier
   quote and applies it in particular to Ozu : Pour un observateur lointain,
    pp. 175, 179 and particularly 185. And he shows how Ozu, coming
   to the talkie in 1936 (The Only Son), introduces a ‘division of labour’
   or a disjunction between the ‘spoken event’ and the fixed image
    ‘empty of events’: pp. 186—9.
46 Marion Vidal analyses a sequence in Rohmer’s Claire’s Knee which
    begins with an almost motionless, sculptural and pictorial image
    and then goes on to a narration which will itself return to the fixed
    image: ‘A to-and-fro between speech and image’ (op. cit., p. 128).
    Vidal shows how in Rohmer speech often creates the event.
    Similarly, in Resnais’ and Robbe-Grillet’s Last Year in Marienbad, a
    to-and-fro occurs between the narrative speech which creates the
    event and the static hotel grounds which assume a mineral or
    tectonic value, with their different areas, white, grey, black.
47 Burch, op. cit., p. 174: from film continuity, ‘there results an effect
    of hiatus which underlines the disjunctive nature of change of shot,
    which elaboration of the rules of montage had always concealed’.
48 Marie-Claire Ropars analyses a movement common in Godard’s
    work in this respect: the separation of the ‘abstract components’ of
    the image will give way to a recomposition of all their audio-visual
    support ‘in an instant, the absolute’, until the components separate
    again <Jean-Luc Godard, Etudes cinématographiques, pp. 20-7).
49 Visual—sound contradictions are numerous in The Man Who Lies:
    the inn is shown full of people whilst the voice presents it as empty;
    Boris’s voice says ‘I don’t know how long I stayed there . . .’ whilst

Notes to pp. 250—254                                                   327
   the image shows him going away. But it is not the contradictions
   which are of fundamental importance according to Gardies, it is
   rather the repetitions and permutations which they allow, based on
   a ‘paradigmatic’ which sets the visual and sound in motion (Le cinéma
   de Robbe-Grillet, ch. V III and conclusion). Chateau and Jost expand
   the notion of paradigm, and bring it to bear on parameters with
   functions of anticipation and retrogression: hence their discovery
   o f‘telestructures’ and an audio-visual code which depends on them
   (Nouveau cinéma, nouvelle sémiologie, ch. VI).
50 Michel Chion shows that the absolute voice-off takes on all the more
   independence because it ceases to know and see everything, giving
   up an omnipotence: he cites Marguerite Duras and Bertolucci, but
   finds a first, remarkable example in Sternberg’s The Saga of
   Anatahan (pp. 30-2). On the ‘voice-off-off, when a rift is introduced
   between the visual and sound, cf. Bonitzer, p. 69. More generally,
   the metamorphoses of voice-off can be followed in the light of the
   distinctions introduced by Percheron, when he calls ‘voice-off-in’
   the case where ‘the speaker is on the screen, but no words come out
   of his mouth’ (Ça, no. 2, octobre 1973), and especially in the light of
   the new topology proposed by Daney (La rampe, pp. 144—7).
51 It is Kant who makes the ‘autonomy-heautonomy’ distinction in
   another context (cf. Critique of Judgement, introduction, section V).
52 Marguerite Duras, Nathalie Granger, followed by La femme du Gange,
   Gallimard, pp. 103—4.
53 Balazs, Le cinéma, ch. XVI.
54 In the field of linguistics, we do not refer to the analysis of the
   dimensions of the speech-act, according to Austin and his success­
   ors, but to the classification of these acts as ‘functions’ or ‘powers’ of
    language (Malinowski, Firth, Marcel Cohen). The present state of
    the question can be found in Ducrot and Todorov’s Encyclopaedic
   Dictionary of the Sciences of Language, trans. Catherine Porter,
    Oxford: Blackwell, 1981, pp. 61—7. The threefold distinction we
    propose, with the interactive, the reflexive and the story-telling,
    seems to us to be based on cinema but to be perhaps more generally
    applicable.
55 On the ‘deprivation’ of language and the ‘return to aphasia’ cf.
    Straub and Huillet, interview in relation to Othon, Cahiers du cinéma,
    no. 224, octobre 1970, and Jean Narboni’s commentaries, ‘La
    vicariance du pouvoir’, which shows how the theatrical scene
    remains ‘involved’ in its cinematographic transformation, p. 45. On
    Fortini Cani, Narboni pointed to ‘the idea of a text turning against
    itself when it is read’ (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 275, p. 13).
56 ‘The framing here is that of speech’ (in Les films de J-M. Straub et
    D. Huillet, Goethe Institut, Paris, p. 55).
57 Straub and Huillet: ‘The dialectic between suffering and violence is
    concealed in the art of Bach himself.’ And they emphasize the
    necessity of showing ‘people in the process of making music’: ‘Each
    piece of music that we will show will be really performed before the

328                                               Notes to pp. 254—258
   camera, picked up directly on sound and filmed in a single shot. The
   core of what will be shown when there is a piece of music is on each
   occasion how this music is made. It may be that it is introduced by a
   score, a manuscript or an original printed edition . . .’ (ibid.,
   pp. 12—14).
58 cf. the detailed analysis of the roles of Moses and Aaron in the
    interview in Cahiers du cinéma, no. 258.
59 On the two moments, their exchange and their circulation in
   Cézanne, cf. Henri Maldiney, Regard, parole, espace, Age d’homme,
    pp. 184—92. Certain commentators have clearly shown the richness
   of the two moments in the Straubs, from different perspectives
   which always lead back to Cézanne: the ‘active mixture between two
    passions, the political and the aesthetic’ (Biette, Cahiers du cinéma,
    no. 332); or double composition, of each shot and of the relation­
    ship between shots, ‘the axis and the air’ (Manfred Bland, Cahiers du
   cinéma, no. 305). This, latter text gives an analysis of the ‘system’ in
   Della Nube. . . ‘Whilst all that was being filmed, the sun moved from
    the east towards the west and lit up the people, who are seen still in
    the same place, from a different angle for each shot. . . And this sun
    is fire, the fire which goes into the earth and wakes up the earth; it is
    a sun setting, and a shot in parallel with the plane of the field.’ The
    Straubs often quote Cézanne’s dictum: ‘Look at the mountain, once
    it was fire.’
60 India Song is one of those films which have led to a great many
    examinations of the visual-sound relationship: notably Pascal
    Bonitzer (Le regard et la voix, pp. 148—53); Dominique Noguez
    (Elogue du cinéma expérimental, Centre Georges-Pompidou,
    pp. 141—9); Dionys Mascolo (in Marguerite Duras, Albatros,
    pp. 143—56). This last collection also contains essential articles on La
   femme du Gange, by Joël Farges, Jean-Louis Libois and Catherine
    Weinzaepflen.
61 Marguerite Duras, Nathalie Granger, followed by La femme du
    Grange-, when ‘the film of the image’ and ‘the film of voices’, without
    being reharmonized, each independently touches the other at the
    infinite point which constitutes their ‘joining’, both ‘die’, at the same
    time as their respective sides are crushed (Marguerite Duras locates
    this point in La femme du Gange, op. cit., pp. 183—4; the film
    continues none the less, as if there were a ‘more’ or a survival which
    will be put into the next film, which is in turn double).
62 Youssef Ishaghpour, D’une image à l’autre, p. 285 (this formulation is
    taken from a detailed analysis of Duras’s work, pp. 225—98).
63 Marguerite Duras talks about the ‘depopulation of space’ in India
    Song, and in particular about ‘The desertedness of the area in Son
    nom de Venise. . . (Marguerite Duras, pp. 20,94). Ishaghpour analyses
    this ‘abandoning of the habitat’ which begins with La femme du
    Gange, pp. 239-40.
64 Viviane Forrester, ‘Territoires du cri’, in Marguerite Duras,
    pp. 171-3.

Notes to pp. 259—261                                                  329
65 cf. Nathalie Heinich’s analysis on the river-speech complementar­
   ity, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 307, pp. 45—7.
66 To the question, ‘Is the text of Fortini not authoritarian?’ Straub
   replies: ‘This language is that of a class in power, but none the less a
   language of someone who has betrayed this class as much as he
   could . . .’ (Conférence de presse, Pesars, 1976; and also ‘all the
   characteristics of peasant wars have something in common with
   these landscapes’).
67 Marguerite Duras put forward the idea, as rather ‘the fugitive
    feeling of a class of violence’ in Nathalie Granger, pp. 76, 95 (and
    p. 52 on the commercial traveller’s very specific situation). Bonitzer
   comments on this class of violence in India Song, which brings
    together ‘lepers, beggars and vice-consuls’: pp. 152—3.
68 Blanchot, L'entretien infini, ‘Speaking is not seeing’, pp. 35—46. This
    is a constant theme in Blanchot, but the piece that we quote is the
    most concentrated example. The role that Blanchot assigns to
   seeing, will be all the better observed, from the other side but in an
   ambiguous or secondary way.
69 On the practical conception of the sound ‘continuum’ and the
    aspects of its novelty, in Fano, cf. especially Gardies, Le cinéma de
   Robbe-Grillet, pp. 85—8. On the treatment of a sound continuum in
    Godard’s First Name Carmen, cf. ‘Les mouettes du pont d'Austerlitz',
    an interview with François Musy, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 355, janvier
     1984. O ur problem of sound framing is not direcdy taken up by
    these authors, although they move decisively towards the solution.
    More generally, technical analyses seem to be lagging behind in this
    respect (apart from Dominique Villain, L ’oeil à la caméra, who asks
    the question direcdy, ch. IV). We believe that a sound framing can
    be technologically defined by:
       1. the number of microphones and their qualitative diversity;
       2. the filters, corrective or for cutting; 3. the tíme modulators,
       with echo or time-lapse (including the Harmonizer); 4. stereo
       sound, in so far as it ceases to be a positioning in space and
       becomes the exploration of a sound-density or time-volume. A
       sound framing can be achieved by home-made means, but only
       because one would know how to produce effects comparable to
       those of modern technology. What is important is that the means
       come into play from the point of the sound recording, and not
       only in the mixing and montage; the difference, moreover, is
       increasingly relative. Glenn Gould is furthest ahead, not only in
       sound montage, but in framing, which he creates with radio (cf.
       the film Radio as Music). Fano’s conception should be compared
       with Gould's. They imply a new conception of music, which
       derives for Fano from Berg, and for Gould from Schoenberg.
       According to Gould, and likewise Cage, it is indeed a question of
       framing, of inventing an active sound-frame for everything that
       surrounds us auditively, for everything that the environment

330                                              Notes to pp. 261—265
      puts at our disposition, cf. The Glenn Gould Reader, Knopf, New
      York; and Geoffroy Paysant, Glenn Gould, un homme du futur,
      ch. IX, which is mistaken in its analyses only in privileging the
      opérations of sound-montage at the expense of those of framing.

10 Conclusions
1 An excellent general presentation of Guillaume’s work in this
  connection will be found in Alain Rey, Théories du signe et du sens,
  Klincksieck, II, pp. 262—4. Ortigues gives a more detailed analysis
  in Le discours et le symbole. Aubier.
2 On the tendency to eliminate the notion of sign, cf. Ducrot and
  Todorov, Encyclopaedic Dictionary of the Sciences of Language,
  pp. 349-65. Christian Metz shares this tendency (Langage et cinéma,
  Albatros, p. 146).
3 Jean-Louis Schefer, L’homme ordinaire du cinéma, Cahiers du cinéma/
  Gallimard.
4 These are the two extreme states of thought, the spiritual automa­
  ton of logic, pointed to by Spinoza and Leibniz, and the psychologi­
  cal automaton of psychiatry, studied by Janet.
5 cf. Serge Daney, La rampe, ’L’Etat-Syberberg’, p. 111 (and p. 172).
  Daney’s analysis is based here on numerous declarations by
  Syberberg himself. Syberberg takes his cue fromi Benjamin, but
  goes further, launching the theme ‘Hitler as film-maker’. Benjamin
  notes only that ‘mass production’ in the domain of art found its
  privileged object in ‘the reproduction of the masses’, grand
  processions, meetings, sporting gatherings, ultimately war (‘The
  work of art in the era of mechanical reproduction’, in Illuminations,
  trans. Harry Zohn, London: Fontana, 1973.
6 Syberberg does not begin like Benjamin from the idea of the
  reproductive arts, but from the idea of cinema as art of the
  movement-image: ‘for a long time people have begun from the
  presupposition which let it be understood that to talk about cinema
  was to talk about movement’, mobile image, mobile camera, and
  montage. He thinks that the culmination of this system is Leni
  Riefenstahl, and her ‘master who was hiding there behind’. ‘But it
  was forgotten that in the cradle of cinema there had also been
  something else, projection, transparency’: another type of image,
  implying ‘slow, controllable movements' capable of bringing con­
  tradiction into the system of movement, or of Hitler —film-maker,
  cf. Syberberg, special num ber of Cahiers du cinéma, février 1980, p. 86.
7 cf. Pascal Kane, ‘Mabuse et le pouvoir’, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 309,
  mars 1980.
8 On not only the technical but the phenomenological differences
  between the types of image, the reader is particularly referred to the
  studies of Jean-Paul Fargier in Cahiers du cinéma and of Dominique

Notes to pp. 265—269                                                331
   Belloir in the special num ber ‘Video art explorations’. In an article
   in Revue d'esthétique (‘Image puissance image’, no. 7, 1984) Edmond
   Couchot defines certain characteristics of numerical or digital
   images, which he calls ‘immedia’, because there is no longer a
   medium properly speaking. The fundamental idea is that, already
   in television, there is no space or image either, but only electronic
   lines: ‘the fundamental concept in television is time’ (Nam June
   Paik, interview with Fargier, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 299, avril 1979).
 9 Sometimes an artist, becoming aware of the death of the will to art in
   a particular medium, confronts the ‘challenge’ by a use which is
   apparently destructive of that medium: one might thus believe in
   negative goals in art, but it is rather a question of making up lost
   time, of converting a hostile area to art, with a certain violence, and
   of turning means against themselves, cf. in regard to television,
   Wolf Vostell’s attitude as analysed by Fargier (‘The great trauma’,
   Cahiers du cinéma, no. 332, février 1982).
10 Noël Burch, Pour un observateur lointain. Cahiers du cinéma/
   Gallimard, p. 185.
11 Leo Steinberg (‘O ther criteria', lecture at the Museum of Modern
   Art, New York, 1968) was already refusing to define modern
   painting by the conquest of a pure optical space, and isolated two
   characteristics which, according to him, were complementary: the
   loss of reference to the vertical human carriage, and the treatment
   of the painting as surface of information; for instance, Mondrian,
   when he metamorphoses the sea and sky more or less into signs, but
   above all with reference to Rauschenberg. ‘The painted surface no
   longer presents an analogy with a natural visual experience, but
   becomes related to operational processes . . . The plane of Raus­
   chenberg’s painting is the equivalent of consciousness plunged into
   the city’s brain.’ In the case of cinema, even for Snow who offers
   himself a ‘fragment of nature in the wild state’, nature and the
   machine ‘inter-represent themselves’: to the extent that visual
   determinations are information data ‘caught in the machine's
   operations and passage’: ‘This is a film as concept where the eye has
   reached the point of not seeing’ (Marie-Christine Questerbert,
   Cahiers du cinéma, no. 296, janvier 1979, pp. 36—7).
12 cf. especially Jean-Claude Bonnet, ‘Trois cinéastes du texte’,
   Cinématographe, no. 31, octobre 1977.
13 On dissociation or disjunction, cf. the articles by Lardeau and by
   Comolli and Géré, in relation to Hitler, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 292,
   September 1978. For the definition of front-projection, and for the
   use of puppets, see the texts of Syberberg himself, in Syberberg,
   pp. 52-65. Bonitzer, in Le champ aveugle, draws out a whole
   conception of the complex shot in Syberberg.
14 cf. a crucial passage in Syberberg, Parsifal, Cahiers du cinéma/
   Gallimard, pp. 46-7.
15 Jean-Pierre Oudart, Cahiers du cinéma, no. 294, novembre 1978,
   pp. 7—9. Syberberg has frequently emphasized his conception of

332                                                Notes to pp. 269—271
      'documents’ and the necessity of constituting a universal video
      school (Syberberg, p. 34); he suggests that the originality of cinema is
      defined in relation to information, rather than in relation to nature
      (Parsifal, p. 160). Sylvie Trosa and Alain Ménil have both under­
      lined the non-hierarchic and non-causal character of the informa­
      tion system according to Syberberg (Cinématographe, no. 40, octobre
       1978, p. 74, and no. 78, mai 1982 p. 20).
16    cf. in this connection Daney's commentaries, La rampe, pp. 110—11.
17    This is a constant theme of Syberberg’s in his great text on
      irrationalism. ‘L’art qui sauve de la misère allemande’ in Change,
      no. 37. If there is none the less an ambiguity in Syberberg in relation
      to Hitler, it is Jean-Claude Biette who has most apdy expressed it: in
      ‘the quantity of pieces of information’ chosen, Syberberg empha­
      sizes ‘persecution against dead persons to the detriment of perse­
      cution of living ones’, ‘ostracism against Mahler’ rather than
      ‘ostracism against Schoenberg’ (Cahiers du cinéma, no. 305, novem­
      bre 1979, p. 47).
18    On myth as irrational story-telling function, and as constitutive
      relation with a people: ‘L’art qui sauve . . . ’ What Syberberg
      reproaches Hitler for is having stolen the German irrational.
19     Michel Chion analyses the paradox of the playback as it functions in
      Parsifal, synchronization no longer has the object of making believe,
      because the miming body ‘apparently remains foreign to the voice it
      gives itself, whether because it is a girl’s face over a man’s voice, or
      because there are two people laying claim to it. The dissociation
      between the voice heard and the body seen is thus not overcome, but
      on the contrary strengthened, accentuated. So what is the purpose
      of synchronization? asks Michel Chion. It becomes part of the
      creative function of myth. I makes the visible body, not now
      something imitating the utterance of the voice but something
      constituting an absolute receiver or addressee. ‘Through it the image
      says to the sound:-stop floating everywhere and come and live in me;
       the body opens to welcome the voice.’ cf. ‘L’aveu’, Cahiers du cinéma,
      no. 338, juillet 1982.
20    The question of redemption runs through Syberberg’s book on
      Parsifal, on two axes: the source and the addressee (the great head
      of Wagner and the Parsifal couple), the visual and sound (the
      ‘cephalic landscapes’ and the spiritual speech-act). But the Parsifal
      couple forms no more of a totality than the rest: redemption comes
      too late, ‘the world is dead, all that is left is a frozen and murdered
      landscape’ (interview in Cinématographe, no. 78, pp. 13—15).
21    This is what Raymond Ruyer has done philosophically in La
      cybernétique et l’origine de l'information, Flammarion. Taking into
      account the evolution of the automaton, he asks the question of the
      source and addressee of information, and constructs a notion of
      ‘framer’ which has connections with the problems of cinematogra­
       phic framing.
22     Paul Schrader has spoken of a ‘transcendental style’ in certain

Notes to pp. 271—274                                                  333
   cinema-authors. But he uses this word to indicate the sudden arrival
   of the transcendent, as he thinks he sees it in Ozu, Dreyer, or
   Bresson (Transcendental Style in Film: Ozu, Dreyer, Bresson, extracts in
   Cahiers du cinema, no. 286, mars 1978). It is thus not the Kantian
   sense, which in contrast opposes the transcendental and the
   metaphysical or transcendent.
23 More precisely, crystal-images are connected to the states of the
   crystal (the four states that we have distinguished), while crystalline
   signs or hyalosigns are connected to its properties (the three aspects
   of the exchange).


Glossary

CHRONOSIGN (point and sheet): an image where dme ceases to be
   subordinate to movement and appears for itself.
CRYSTAL-IMAGE OR HYALOSIGN: the uniting of an actual image
   and a virtual image to the point where they can no longer be
   distinguished.
DREAM-IMAGE OR ONIROSIGN: an image where a movement of
   world replaces action
LECTOSIGN: a visual image which must be ‘read’ as much as seen.
NOOSIGN: an image which goes beyond itself towards something which
   can only be thought.
OPSIGN: an image which breaks the sensory-motor schema, and where
   the seen is no longer extended into action.
RECOl '-ECTION-IMAGE OR MNEMOSIGN: a virtual image which
   ei ici s into a relationship with the actual image and extends it.


Index
8 V2 (Fellini) 8,56, 76, 89,90,92     An Autumn Afternoon (Ozu) 14
32 166
2001 : A Space Odyssey (Kubrick)      Bande à part (Godard) 171, 184
   205-6,233, 265                     Band Wagon (Minnelli) 61—2
                                      The Barefood Contessa (Mankie­
action-image 2,4, 6, 15, 23, 26,        wicz) 49-51
   28, 31-34,40,45,47,64,76-7,        Barocco (Téchiné) 212
    103-4, 163, 173, 192, 198, 203,   Battleship Potemkin (Einsenstein)
   272                                   158, 162,226
An Actor’s Revenge (Ichikawa) 72,     Beau mariage (Rohmer) 177
    126                               Begone Dull Care (McLaren) 215
The Adventure (Antonioni) 6, 8        Belle dejour (Bunuel) 102
Agatha et les lectures illimitées     Bene, Carmelo 190—1, 220
   (Duras) 258                        Bergson, Henri 20,27,33,44—7,
Agostino di Ippona (Rossellini)         53-6, 66-8,79,81-2, 87, 98-9,
   247                                   106,109-10,118,122-3, 147,
Akerman, Chantel 196,198                207,211
Alexander Nevksy (Einsenstein)        Berkeley, Busby 60-1
    163, 238                          Bertolucci, Bernardo 149
All About Eve (Mankiewicz) 49-51      The Best Years of Our Life (Wyler)
Alphaville (Godard) 265                  108
Amarcord (Fellini) 73, 90, 92         La bête lumineuse (Perrault) 150,
An American in Paris (Minelli) 62        223
Amerika, rapports de classe           Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
   (Straub) 254-5,259                    (Lang) 138
L'amour à mort (Resnais) 207-8,       Beyrouth la rencontre (Alaouie) 233
   214,244,249                        Bicycle Thief (Die Sica) 1
L'amourfou (Rivette) 76,193           The Big Mouth (Lewis) 61
L ’amour par terre (Rivette) 194      TheBigSleep (Hawks) 233
Anna’s Rendezvous (Akerman) 196       Birth of a Nation (Griffith) 153
Antonioni, Michelangelo xi, 4—8,      The Black Bird (Browning) 72
    17,23-4, 75, 129, 149,189,        Black God and White Devil
   204-5, 237,244,252                    (Rocha) 218,222
Antonio das Mortes (Rocha) 222        Black Moon (Malle) 60
Appuntisu un Fatto (Visconti) 38      Blaise Pascal (Rossellini) 247
Arsenic and Old Lace (Capra)          Blinkity Blank (McLaren) 215
   231-2                              The Bloodhound (Mankiewicz) 49,
Artaud, Antonin 165-8,170-4,             51
    191,212                           Blowing Wild (Zinneman and
L ’assassin musicien (Jacquot) 212      Tiomkin) 93
Astruc, Alexandre 173-5               The Blue Angel (Sternberg) 229
Atlantic City (Malle) 60              Brakhage, Stan 200
Attack (Metzner) 56                   Breathless (Godard) 9,186
Aurélia Steiner (Duras 258            Brecht, Berthold 139,192—4

338                                                                 Index
Bresson, Robert 12—13,78,              The Clowns (Fellini) 90
  129,171,177-8, 181,183,201,          Cobweb Castle (Kurosawa) 169
  214,235,242-4,267                    Le cochon (Eustache) 197
Brigadoon (Minnelli) 63—4              Cocorico Monsieur Poulet (Rouch)
Brocka, Lino 217—219                      151
Browning,Tod 72,84,128                 La Collectioneuse (Rohmer) 177
Bunuel, Luis 57—9,102—3                Comment ça va (Godard) 21, 183
                                       Comolli, Jean-Louis 219
The Cabinet of Dr Caligari             La concentration (Garrel) 199
  (Lang) 263                           The Connexion (Clarke) 154
The Cameraman (Vertov) 76              Conrad, Tony 215
Le Camion (Duras) 257—8                Conversation Piece (Visconti) 94, 96
Camouflage (Zanussi) 71                La coquille et le clergyman (Dulac/
Capricci (Bene) 190                      Artaud) 167
Les Carabiniers (Godard) 18,45,        The Crimson Curtain (Astruc)
   186, 194                               174-5
Carné, Marcel 480—9,52—3,68,           Le cuisinier du roi (Syberberg) 267
  93
Casanova (Fellini) 91                  The Damned (Visconti) 95
Ceddo (Sembene) 222                    Daybreak (Carné) 48, 56, 68, 93
Celine and Julie Co Boating            A Day in the Country (Renoir) 86—7
  (Rivette) 10, 193                    Death in Venice (Visconti) 94, 96
The Central Region (Snow) 266          Demy, Jacques 67
C’était un Québécois en Bretagne       Dernier Caprice (Ozu) 14
  (Perrault) 219                       De Sica, Vittorio 1,3,7, 12,60
Chabrol, Claude 50,231                 Destry She Said (Duras) 257
Chahine, Youssef 220-1                 The Devil and the Flesh (Bunuel)
La chair de l'orchidée (Chereau)          102
   195                                 Diagonal Symphony (Eggeling) 214
Chereau, Patrice 195                   Dionysos (Rouch) 152
Un chien andalou (Bunuel) 57—8         The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie
Chimes at Midnight (Welles) 139           (Bunuel) 102
La chinoise (Godard) 186               The Disorderly Orderly (Lewis) 66
Chronicle of Anna Magdalena Bach       Dix-Huit secondes 166—7
   (Straub) 253                        Dr Strangelove (Kubrick) 205
Chronopolis (Kamler) 105, 147          Documenteur (Varda) 135, 197
La cicatrice intérieure (Garvel) 202   Doigts dans la tête (Doillon) 198,
Circle of Deceit (Doillon) 136            202
Citizen Kane (Welles) 70, 74, 88,      Doillon, Jacques 136,198,202—3
   99,105-113,148                      Donen, Stanley 61-4
City of Women (Fellini) 60, 89         DonJuan (Bene) 190
Clair, Réné 57—8, 67, 234—5            Dovzhenko, Alexander 28, 75,
Clair’s Knee (Rohmer) 242                 82,216
Clarke, Shirley 150,153—4              dream-image 56—8, 68—9, 80, 92,
Cleopatra (Mankiewicz) 52—3               127,129,273
Cleofrom 5 to 7 (Varda) 197            Dreyer, Carl Theodore 39, 71,
The Clock (Minnelli) 63                   109,128,169-72, 176-8,201,
A Clockwork Orange (Kubrick) 206          236,267

Index                                                              339
La drôlesse (Doillon) 198             First Name Carmen (Godard) 172,
Dulac, Germaine 166                      193, 195-6,234, 236, 249, 276
Duras, Marguerite 182,250-61, The Flavour of Green Tea Over Rice
   267-8,278-9                           (Ozu) 15
                                      Flesh (Morrissey/Warhol)) 192
Early Summer (Ozu) 16                 The Flicker (Conrad) 215
Earth Entranced (Rocha) 219, 222 The Flock (Güney) 218
The Earth Trembles (Visconti) 4, 97 Follow the Fleet (Sandrich) 61
Eat (Warhol) 191                      Ford,John 148,171,216,218,
The Eclipse (Antonioni) 5, 9, 237        227-8
Eisenstein, Sergei 29, 35,39,         Fortini Cani (Straub) 244, 246,
   42-3,93, 156-69, 171, 182,            253-4
   204, 210-2, 216, 226,228, 233, The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse
   238-9,245                             (Minnelli) 63-4
Les enfants désaccordés (Garrell)     France tour détour deux enfants
   202                                   (Godard) 154
Les enfants du paradis (Carné) 48     Freaks (Browning) 72
Les enfants du placard (Jacquot)      French Cancan (Renoir) 86
   212
L'enfant secret (Garrel) 198—200      Gance, Abel 40, 157, 164-5
The Enforcer (Walsh) 233              Garrel, Philippe 168-9,173,
Entr’acte (Clair) 57—8                   198-202
Epstein, Jean 36, 39, 59,160,181 Genèse (Bresson) 201
Europe ’51 (Rossellini) xi, 2,21,     The General Line (Eisenstein)
   45-6,54,171                           158-9,216
Eustache, Jean 197—8,202,             Germany YearO (Rossellini) xi, 2
   249-50                             Gertrud (Dreyer) 41,170—1,
Eve (Losey) 70                           176-7
The Exterminating Angel (Bunuel)      Gloria (Cassavetes) 193
   102                                Godard,Jean-Luc 9, 10, 12,
                                         18-19, 22-3, 38,42,45,68, 76,
Faces (Cassavetes) 154,192               78, 121, 132-5, 149,153-5,
The Fall of the House of Usher           171-3, 175, 179-88,193-6,
   (Epstein) 59                          198-9, 203-5,214, 220, 231,
FamilyJewels (Lewis) 66                  234, 236, 248-9,265, 267,269,
The Fantastic Night (L’Herbier) 60       276-8,280
Faure, Elie 156—7,171                 The Golden Coach (Renoir) 84—5,
Fellini, Federico 4—6, 8, 18, 60,        87
   66, 73,76-7, 88-93,99,135          Le grand escroc (Godard) 133—4
La femme du Gange (Duras) 251,        The Grand Illusion (Renoir) 87
   257,260-1                          The Grapes of Wrath (Ford) 218
Unefemme est une femme (Godard) Greed (Stroheim) 108
   184                                The Green Room (Truffaut) 74
La femme qui pleure (Doillon) 202 Gremillion, Jean 93
F for Fake (Welles) 145               Griffith, D. W. 107, 159-60,163,
La fille prodigue (Doillon) 203          226
The Film that Rises to the Surface of La guerre estfinie (Resnais) 118,
   Clarified Butter (Landow) 215         216

340                                                                  Index
Güney, Yilmaz 171,218                 Ju T u II Elle (Akerman) 196
                                      Le jeu avec lefeu (Robbe-Grillet)
Hail Mary (Godard) 173                    102
Un Hamlet de moins (Bene) 191         Jules etJim (Truffaut) 202
Hangmen die too (Lang) 138            Juliet of the Spirits (Fellini) 89
Heart of Glass (Herzog) 74            Julius Caesar (Mankiewicz) 52—3
Herzog, W erner 12,74—5,129
Hiroshima mon amour (Resnais)          Kafka, Franz 114,217-9,221-2,
    117-9,122                            254-5
Hitchcock, Alfred 3, 23, 34,57,        Kamler, Piotr 105, 147
   72,82,148,163-4,233, 267            Kazan, Elia 4,28
Hitler, afilm from Germany             Keaton, Buster 57-8, 64—5, 76,
   (Syberberg) 264, 268                   160-1,226
Hollywood or Bust (Lewis) 65           Kubrick, Stanley 205-6, 233, 265
L'homme atlantique (Duras) 258         Kurosawa, Akira 15,75,128,
L’homme blessé (Chereau) 195              169, 176, 201
L’hotel des Amériques (Téchiné)
   212                                 The Ladies Man (Lewis) 65
House of Pleasure (Ophüls) 83          The Ladyfrom Shanghai (Welles)
 Huillet, Danièle, see Straub,           70, 73,112-5, 139, 144-5
   Jean-Marie                          Lang, Fritz 10,40, 138-9, 148-9,
 Huston, John 73                          157,227-8,233,237
                                       The Last Laugh (Murnau) 229
 Ichikawa, 72, 126                     The Last Man (Murnau) 58
Ici et ailleurs (Godard) 179—80,       The Last Moment (Fejos) 56
    185, 193                           Last Year in Marienbad (RobbeIdentification of a Woman                 Grillet) 7,39,76-7,101,
   (Antonioni) 8                          103-5,117-9,121-4,250
Illumination (Zanussi) 71              Late Autumn (Ozu) 15
The Immortal Story (Welles) 76,       Late Spring (Ozu) 14, 16—7
    149                                Leacock, Stephen 149-50
L'immortelle (Robbe-Grillet) 101       Leibniz, G. W. 14-15,129-32
The Imperative (Zanussi) 71            The Leopard (Viscond) 94, 96—7
India Song (Duras) 250,256—8           Letter to Freddy Buache (Godard)
The Innocent (Visconti) 94—5              187
Intolerance (Griffith) 107            A Letter to Three Wives (Mankie­
The Invisible Man (Whale) 233             wicz) 49—51
It’s All True (Welles) 137,145,148     Lewis, Jerry 64—7, 234
It’s Only Money (Lewis) 66             L’Herbier, Marcel 60,78
Ivan the Terrible (Eisenstein) 163,    Liberté la nuit (Garrel) 199
   216                                 Life is a Bed of Roses (Resnais) 118,
                                          124,206
Jacquot, Benoit 212,214                Lift to the Scaffold (Malle) 60
Jaguar (Rouch) 151                     The Lion has Seven Heads (Rocha)
Jeanne Dielman (Akerman) 196              222
Je t’aime, je t'aime (Resnais) 82,    Le lit de la vierge (Garrel) 198
    116-8,120,122, 207-8, 213-4,       The Little Match Girl (Renoir) 84
   266, 277                           Little Theatre (Renoir) 86

Index                                                            341
Lola Montez (Ophüls) 83—4           Mirror (Tarkovsky) 75
The Lonely Woman (Rossellini) 2     Mizoguchi, Kenji 15,176, 234
Losey, Joseph 70                    Moby Dick (Huston) 73
Los Olvidados (Bunuel) 59           Modem Times (Chaplin) 66
Love Me Tonight (Mamoulian) 227     Moi un noir (Rouch) 151,223
The Lovers (Malle) 60               Mon coeur est rouge (Rosier) 197
Love Streams (Cassavetes) 193       Money (Bresson) 78
Lubitsch, Ernst 13,163,232          Money (L’Herbier) 78
Ludwig (Visconti) 94—6              Mon oncle (Tati) 67
Lumet, Sydney 138,265               Moses et Aaron (Straub) 245, 254
                                    Mother (Pudovkin) 218
M (Lang) 138,227-8                  The Mother and the Whore
Macbeth (Welles) 115,169              (Eustache) 198,202
Madame Bovary (Minnelli) 64         movement-image xi, 1, 26-43,
Madame de... (Ophüls) 83              47, 64,75-8,90,101, 128-9,
Made in the USA (Godard) 9—10,        137, 142, 156-60,163-5, 213,
   184                                237-8, 240-1, 263-66, 270-2,
The Magnificent Ambersons             276
  (Welles) 110,122,240              Mr Arkadin (Welles) 38,106,
Les maîtresfous (Rouch) 151, 223      110-14,140, 144
Malle, Louis 60                     M r Hulot’s Holiday (Tati) 67,234
Mankiewicz, Joseph xii, 48—53,      Mrs Muir's Adventure (Mankie­
  68, 127, 227-30,233,237, 273        wicz) 51
The Man Who Knew Too Much           Murder (Hitchcock) 72
  (Hitchcock) 133                   Muriel (Resnais) 116,118,122—3,
The Man Who Lies (Robbe-Grillet)      134,240
   101,131-3,250,260                Mur Murs (Varda) 197
Marie pour mémoire (Garrel)         Murnau, F. W. 40,58-9,157,
   198-9, 202                         225-6,229, 233
The Marquise of O (Rohmer) 242      My American Uncle (Resnais) 116,
A Married Woman (Godard) 182,          118-21,206
  267                               My Night at Maud's (Rohmer) 177
Masculin, féminin (Godard) 154
McLaren, Norman 215                 Narcosis (Abel) 56
Mechanics of Love (Mass and         Nathalie Granger (Duras) 257, 259
   Moore) 192                       The Navigator (Keaton) 160-1
Melville, Herman 72,115,133—4,      Nietzsche, Friedrich 8,43,113,
   145,147                            131, 133—4, 137-9, 141, 145,
Memory (Chahine) 220—1                147,149-50,171-2, 176,239,
Le mépris (Godard) 10,185,193         255
Merry-go-round (Rivette) 11         Night and Fog (Resnais) 121—2
Mes petites amoureuses (Eustache)   Night of the Hunter (Laughton) 59
   197                              Notre-Dame des Turcs (Bene) 190
The Messiah (Rossellini) 247        The Nutty Professor (Lewis) 65
Metropolis (Lang) 233, 263
 Minnelli, Vincente 61—4,102,
   113                              Obsession (Visconti) 4, 96
Miracle in Milan (De Sica) 60       October (Eisenstein) 162

342                                                             Index
One Sings, the Other Doesn’t         Le petit soldat (Godard) 19
   (Varda) 197                       Phantom (Murnau) 59
L'ombre rouge (Comolli) 219          The Phantom of Liberty (Bunuel)
Ophüls, Max 70, 83—9,93, 267            102
Opposition (Eisenstein) 158          Les photos d'Alix (Eustache)
opsign 6,8-9,12—13,15,17,            249-50
   22-3,34,41,62, 66,69,137,         Pickpocket (Bresson) 12
   272-3                             Picnic on the Grass (Renoir) 86—7
Orchestra Rehearsals (Fellini) 93    Pierrot lefou (Godard) 9, 184—7,
Ordet (Dreyer) 170                      194, 249
Othello (Welles) 111                 La pirate (Doillon) 136,198,
The Others (Santiago) 134              202-3
Othon (Straub) 244, 253              The Pirate (Minnelli) 63
Our Hospitality (Keaton) 226         Playtime (Tad) 66-7, 234
The Outcry (Antonioni) 8,23,189      Le pont du nord (Rivette) 10 ■
Ozu, Yasujiro xiii, 13—17, 19,22,    A Portrait of Jason (Clarke) 154
   28,128-9, 246-7,266, 273          Pour la suite du monde (Perrault)
                                        150,221,223
Paisà (Rossellini) 1                 Proust 11,39,82,97,207, 231
Paradjanov, Sergei 28                Providence (Resnais) 121, 124,
Paris Belongs to Us (Rivette) 76        207,213
Paris vu par ...20 ans après 196,    Pudovkin, Vsevolod 158, 204,
    198                                 216,218, 240, 250
Parsifal (Syberberg) 264, 268, 270   Pyjama Picnic (Donen) 62
Pasolini, Pier Paolo 28,35—7,
   148-9, 153,174-6, 183,244         recollection-image 38,46-50,
Passion (Godard) 10, 76, 78, 172,       53-6, 79-80, 84,91,98-9,
    193-5,276                           105-6,109-11, 113-15, 122-3,
The Passenger (Antonioni) 9             129,273
Passing Fancy (Ozu) 17               Reflections on Black (Brakhage)
The Passion ofJoan of Arc (Dreyer)      200
   225, 236                          La règle du jeu (Renoir) 84—7,108
Paths of Glory (Kubrick) 206         La règne du jour (Perrault) 150,
The Patsy (Lewis) 65                    219, 223
Le pays de la terre sans arbres      Renoir, Jean 84—91, 93,108,173,
   (Perrault) 150, 223, 244             252
Un pays sans bons sens (Perrault)    Resistenza (Straub) 244, 246,
   217,219,223                          253-5,259
Peirce, C. S. 30—4                   Resnais, Alain xii, 22,28,38-9,
People Will Talk (Mankiewicz)           42,54,76, 82, 10S-5, 116-25,
   227,237                              129,132,140, 143, 155,181-2,
Perceval le Gallois (Rohmer)            204-16,244, 247,249,266,
    176-7,242,244                       275,277-fl
The Perfect Wife (Minnelli) 64       La révélateur (Garrel) 198—9,
Perrault, Pierre xiii, 38, 150-3,       202
    183,217,219,221-3,243-4,         La révolte du boucher 166
   275                               Rhytmus23 (Richter) 214
Peter Ibbetson (Hathaway) 59         Riefenstahl, Leni 164

Index                                                                343
The Rise to Power of Louis XIV         Singing in the Rain (Donen) 61-2
  (Rossellini) 247—8                   Sixfois deux (Godard) 179-80
The River (Renoir) 86                     183,248
Rivette, Jacques 10-12,19,76—7,        Sleep (Warhol) 191
  194                                  Slow Motion (Godard) 10,68,185
Robbe-Grillet, Alain 12,21,44—5,          195, 203,248—9,276
  68, 76, 101-5, 109, 117, 120,        Socrates (Rossellini) 247
  122, 126, 129-132, 134, 155,         Solaris (Tarkovsky) 75
  182,243,247, 250,252,260,            Son nom de Venise dans Calcutta
  266, 275                                desert (Jiuras) 257
Rocco and his Brothers (Visconti) 4,   sonsign 6, 8-9, 12-13,15, 22-3
  97                                      34,41,62, 66,69, 272-3
Rocha, Glauber 171,218, 220—3          Spellbound (Hitchcock) 57
Rohmer, Eric 176-8,183, 242—4,         Spiral (Zanussi) 71
  247, 266                             The State of Things (Wenders)
Roma (Fellini) 89                         76-8
La ronde (Ophuls) 83                   Les statues meurent aussi (Resnais)
Rosier, Michèle 197                       124
La rosière de Pessac (Eustache) 197    Stavisky (Resnais) 125,132-4,
Rossellini, Roberto xi, 1-2, 19,          207-8
  23,45-6,171-2,247-8, 251-2           A Storyfrom Chikmatsu
Rota, Nino 93                             (Mizoguchi) 234
Rouch.Jean 23,38,150-4,183,            A Story of Floating Weeds
  223-4, 243, 275                         (Ozu) 16—17
Un royaume vous attend (Perrault)      A Story of a Love Affair
  244                                     (Antonioni) 5, 8, 23—4
Ruggles of Red Gap (McCarey) 232       Lastrada (Fellini) 92
                                       Straub, Jean Marie xiii, 23,
Une sale histoire (Eustache) 197—8        215-16, 244-7, 252-61, 267-8,
Salo (Pasolini) 174—5                     278
Salomé (Bene) 190-1                    The Stranger (Welles) 139
Sandra (Visconti) 38, 95               Strike (Eisenstein) 1607 228
Sartre, Jean-Paul 60,63,88,106         Stromboli (Antonioni) xi, 2, 18, 46
Satyricon (Fellini) 89—90              The Structure of Crystals (Zanussi)
Sayat Nova (Paradjanov) 28                70
Schlondorff, Volker 136                Suddenly Last Summer (MankieSchmid, Daniel 21,136                     wicz) 50
Schroeter, W erner 136                 Sunrise (Murnau) 233
Sembene, Ousmane 222—3                 Swingtime (Stevens) 61
Senso (Visconti) 3, 94—6               Syberberg, H ansjurgen xiii, 109,
The Servant (Losey) 70                    126,264,267-70,278
Severed heads (Rocha) 222
Shadows (Cassavetes) 154,192           Tabu (Murnau) 225—6, 233
SherlockJunior (Keaton) 57—8, 76       Tarkovsky, Andrei xii, 42—3,75,
The Shining (Kubrick) 205-6               129
The Ship Sails On (Fellini) 73         Tati, Jacques 9-10,66—7,234
Shoot the Piano Player (Truffaut)      T6chin6, Andre 212,214
  249                                  The Tender Enemy (Ophüls) 83

344                                                                 Index
The Testament of Dr Mabuse             Vampyr (Dreyer) 169-70,267
  (Lang) 233,237,263                   Van Gogh (Resnais) 119—21,209
That Night’s Wife (Ozu) 17             Varda, Agnes 135,197
That Obscure Object of Desire          Vera Baxter (Duras) 257
  (Bunuel) 103                         Vertov, Dziga 40, 76, 157, 204,
Theorem (Pasolini) 174—5                 216,226
Three on a Couch (Lewis) 66            Vertigo (Hitchcock) 82
time-image xi-xiii, 27,34, 39,         Vidor, King 216
  41-2,78,98-9, 101,103-5,             Violette Noziére (Chabrol) 50
   109, 125,129-33,135,137,            Visconti, Luchino xii, 3—4, 9, 39,
   152-3,155,181,189,195,205,            94-7, 135,270
  207,214,250,261,263-4,               Les visiteurs du soir (Carné) 48
  266-7, 270-1, 273-5,278-9            Vivre sa vie (Godard) 186,193,
To Have and Have Not (Hawks)             249
  233
Touch of Evil (Welles) 115,            Weekend (Godard) 182,186,234
   139-40, 142,144-5                   Welles, Orson xii, 22,38—9,42,
Toute révolution est un coup de dés      54, 70,76, 88,99,105-7, 120,
  (Straub) 256                           137,139-49,155, 169,173,
Toute une nuit (Akerman)                 176,181-2, 209,240,275-6,
   196                                   278
Traffic (Tati) 66-7                    Wenders, Wim 76-8,136
Trans-Europe Express (Robbe-           What did the Lady Forget ? (Ozu) 16
  Grillet) 101,134                     Whispers in the City (Mankiewicz)
The Trial (Welles) 110,114-5,            49,51
   139, 144-5                          White Nights (Visconti) 9
Trop tôt, trop tard (Straub) 244       The Whole Town’s Talking
Truffaut, Francois 3, 74,85,202,         (Ford) 227
  231,249                              Who’s Minding the Store?
Twelve Angry Men (Lumet) 138             (Lewis) 66
Twilight (Rivette) 11                  Why Alexandria? (Chachine) 220
The Two English Girls (Truffaut)       A Woman’s Decision (Zanussi) 71
  202                                  The Woman of Tokyo (Ozu) 16
Two or Three Things I Know About       A Woman under the Influence
  Her (Godard) 10,12,19,186,             (Cassavetes) 193
  267                                  Workshop Experiment in Animated
                                         Sound (McCIaren) 215
Umberto D (De Sica) 1,3,7
Undercurrent (Minnelli) 63             Yol (Güney) 218
Under the Roofs of Paris (Clair) 235   Yolande (Minelli) 63
The Unholy Three (Browning) 72
The Unknown (Browning) 72              Zanussi, Kristof 70, 75
Unreconciled (Straub) 216, 254         Zvenigora (Dovzhenko) 82