Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature

This page intentionally left blank

Kafka
Toward a Minor Literature

Gilles Deleuze and
Felix Guattari
Translation by Dana Polan
Foreword by Réda Bensmai'a

Theory and History of Literature, Volume 30

            University of Minnesota Press
              MinneapolLondon

The University of Minnesota gratefully acknowledges
translation assistance provided for this book by the French
Ministry of Culture.

Copyright © 1986 by the University of Minnesota
Originally published as Kafka: Pour une littérature mineure
Copyright © 1975 by Les éditions de Minuit, Paris.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
publisher.

Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290, Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
Seventh printing 2003

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Deleuze, Gilles.
  Kafka: toward a minor literature.

   (Theory and history of literature ; v. 30)
   Bibliography: p.
   Includes index.
    1. Kafka, Franz, 1883-1924—Criticism and
interpretation. I. Guattari, Felix. II. Title.
III. Series.
PT2621.A26Z67513           1986      833'.912  85-31822
ISBN 0-8166-1514-4
ISBN 0-8166-1515-2 (pbk.)

The University of Minnesota
is an equal-opportunity
educator and employer.

Contents

Foreword: The Kafka Effect by Réda Bensmai'a ix
Translator's Introduction xxii

1. Content and Expression 3
2. An Exaggerated Oedipus 9
3. What Is a Minor Literature? 16
4. The Components of Expression 28
5. Immanence and Desire 43
6. Proliferation of Series 53
7. The Connectors 63
8. Blocks, Series, Intensities 72
9. What Is an Assemblage? 81

Notes 91
Index 101

Theory and History of Literature
Edited by Wlad Godzich and Jochen Schulte-Sasse

Volume 1.   Tzvetan Todorov Introduction to Poetics
Volume 2.   Hans Robert Jauss Toward an Aesthetic of Reception
Volume 3.   Hans Robert Jauss
            Aesthetic Experience and Literary Hermeneutics
Volume 4.   Peter Burger Theory of the Avant-Garde
Volume 5.   Vladimir Propp Theory and History of Folklore
Volume 6.   Edited by Jonathan Arac, Wlad Godzich,
            and Wallace Martin
            The Yale Critics: Deconstruction in America
Volume 7.   Paul de Man Blindness and Insight:
            Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary Criticism
            2nd ed., rev.
Volume 8.   Mikhail Bakhtin Problems of Dostoevsky's Poetics
Volume 9.   Erich Auerbach
            Scenes from the Drama of European Literature
Volume 10. Jean-Francois Lyotard
           The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge
Volume 11. Edited by John FeketeThtructuraAllegory:
           Reconstructive Encounters with the New French Thought
Volume 12. Ross Chambers Story and Situation: Narrative Seduction
           and the Power of Fiction
Volume 13. Tzvetan TodorovMikhaiBakhtinheDialogicalPrinciple
Volume 14. Georges Bataille Visions of Excess: Selected Writings,
           1927-1939
Volume 15. Peter SzondiOnTextuaUnderstandingndtherssays

Volume 16. Jacques Attali Noise
Volume 17. Michel de Certeau Heterologies
Volume 18. Thomas G. Pavel The Poetics of Plot: The Case of English
           Renaissance Drama
Volume 19. Jay Caplan Framed Narratives: Diderot's Genealogy
           of the Beholder
Volume 20. Jean-Francois Lyotard and Jean-Loup Thebaud
           Just Gaming
Volume 21. Malek Alloula The Colonial Harem
Volume 22. Klaus TheweleitMaleFantasies,
           Volume 1. Women, Floods, Bodies, History
Volume 23. Klaus Theweleit Male Fantasies,
           Volume 2. Male Bodies: Psychoanalyzing the White Terror
Volume 24. Héléne Cixous and Catherine Clement
           The Newly Born Woman
Volume 25. Jose Antonio Maravall Culture of the Baroque: Analysis of a
           Historical Structure
Volume 26. Andrej Warminski Readings in Interpretation: Holderlin,
           Hegel, Heidegger
Volume 27. Stephen Melville Philosophy Beside Itself: On Deconstruc-
           tion and Modernism
Volume 28. Edited by Jonathan Arac Postmodernism and Politics
Volume 29. Peter Szondi Theory of the Modern Drama
Volume 30. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari Kafka: Toward a Minor
           Literature

This page intentionally left blank

Foreword
The Kafka Effect
Reda Bensmai'a

Translated by Terry Cochran

            Writing is born from and deals with the acknowledged doubt of
            an explicit division, in sum, of the impossibility of one's own
            place. It articulates an act that is constantly a beginning: the sub-
            ject is never authorized by a place, it could never install itself in
            an inalterable cogito, it remains a stranger to itself and forever
            deprived of an ontological ground, and therefore it always comes
            up short or is in excess, always the debtor of a death, indebted
            with respect to the disappearance of a genealogical and territorial
            "substance," linked to a name that cannot be owned.
                          —Michel de Certeau, L'Ecriture de ITiistoire (Paris:
                          Gallimard, 1975), p. 327

In December 1934, the Jüdische Rundschau published an important text on
Kafka by Walter Benjamin, in which we can read these decisive words: "There
are two ways to miss the point of Kafka's works. One is to interpret them naturally, the other is the supernatural interpretation. Both the psychoanalytic and
the theological interpretations equally miss the essential points."1 In 1974, when
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari devoted a book to Kafka's work, they took
their point of departure from the same principle: one misses the mark in Kafka
either by putting him in the nursery—by oedipalizing and relating him to motherfather narratives—or by trying to limit him to theological-metaphysical speculation to the detriment of all the political, ethical, and ideological dimensions that
run through his work and give it a special status in the history of literature. At

                                         ix

                                 xFOREWORD

the least, this initial convergence between Benjamin's approach and that advanced by Deleuze and Guattari seems worthy of note.
    When we read each of the studies carefully, we cannot help being struck by
the care taken in each case to avoid what might be called a political-ideological
recuperation of Kafka or, perhaps, to avoid falling back upon what Deleuze and
Guattari call a hard segment: the binary machine of social classes, sexes, neurosis, mysticism, and so on. In both cases, we find ourselves face to face with the
same attempt to avoid making Kafka just another great litterateur. Both pinpoint
the need to make way for new philosophical, literary, and even psychological
categories to come to terms with this unique work and to lead readers out of the
impasse created by so many readings of exegesis.
    First, let us read and consider what Benjamin would have us think about
Kafka: What is the substance of what he says? What is he attempting to have
us experience, and not simply interpret or read? What writing machine—
already! —does he want to connect us to? Recall that the study begins withap
litical apologue: Potemkin was having a crisis and was therefore inaccessible,
but affairs of state were pending. There was a stack of documents that urgently
needed to be signed, and the high officials were at the end of their rope; but a
or clerk named Shuvalkin who was informed of the problem took hold of
the documents, impassively marched into Potemkin's bedroom, presented the
papers to him, and pressed him to sign them. Without blinking—at least, so it
seemed—Potemkin signed all the documents presented to him one after the
other. Everyone knows what happened: when the high officials finally had the
famous documents in hand, they were stupefied to decipher in each instance the
name Shuvalkin. Benjamin continues in a way that is highly significant for us:
   This story is like a herald racing two hundred years ahead of Kafka's
   work. The enigma which beclouds it is Kafka's enigma. The world of
   offices and registries, of musty, shabby, dark rooms, is Kafka's world.
   The obliging Shuvalkin, who makes light of everything and is finally
   left empty-handed, is Kafka's K. (p. 112)
    The "reading" that Benjamin proposes for Kafka's work is clear from the outset and is characterized-no less than that of Deleuze and Guattari—by never
trying to find archetypes that claim to have "qualified" Kafka's "imaginary" or
to interpret his work by moving from the unknown back to the known: the Castle
is God, the world of the father, power that cannot be grasped; the cockroach
is anxiety, castration, the dreamworld and its multiple metamorphoses, and so
forth. But what is still more striking, neither does Benjamin try-he doesn't con
sider it useful or necessary—to relate Kafka's work to a structure with preformed
formal oppositions and a signifier of the kind in which "after all is said and done,
xefers to y"! Not at all. The reading of Kafka both in Benjamin and in Deleuze
and Guattari is determined by the prominence they give to a politics of Kafka;

                                  FOREWORDxi

but, as Deleuze and Guattari go on to articulate, this politics is "neither imaginary nor symbolic."
   In characterizing the hordes of messengers, judges, assistants, intermediaries, and lawyers who haunt Kafka's text, Benjamin never takes refuge behind
a symbolic, allegorical, or mythical interpretation: he considers Kafka's ancestors to be the Jews and Chinese of ancient or contemporary history, or even the
Greeks, rather than considering Kafka to be the descendant of "Atlases" who
would carry the globe of the world on the back of his neck. Refuge behind myth,
recourse to myth as the last hope, is radically rejected:
   Even the world of myth of which we think in this context is incom-
   parably younger than Kafka's world, which has been promised redemp-
   tion by the myth. But if we can be sure of one thing, it is this:Kafka
   did not succumb to its temptation, (p. 117; my emphasis)
    Nor would Benjamin have yielded to the temptation to take refuge behind
myth; to do so would be to inject mythical meanings into Kafka's work-to say
that Kafka is to modernity what classical myth was to traditional society. Benjamin was one of the first "readers" of Kafka to see and then try to show-to
demonstrate—that Kafka's work was, from a certain point of view, to be taken
literally: in a word, that it functioned on the surface of its signs and that the issue
was not-at least, not only-to try to interpret it but, above all, to practice it as
an experimental machine, a machine for effects, as in physics. Of course, it is
a writing machine or a mass of writing machines that are made of assemblages
of nouns and effects, of heterogeneous orders of signs that cannot be reduced
to a binary structure, to a dominant or transcendental signifier, or ultimately to
some phantasm (originary or not).
    Benjamin (who was very well acquainted with Freudian psychoanalysis) was
able to avoid at every step the "dreary psychoanalytic interpretations" (Deleuze).
When he evoked the well-known texts in which Kafka addresses the father, Benjamin immediately showed how close the link is between what Kafka foregrounds about the relation to the Father and a juridical-political "assemblage"
that exceeds and determines the father-son relation since time "immemorial" (as
he liked to say):
   The father is the one who punishes; guilt attracts him as it does the
   court officials. There is much to indicate that the world of the officials
   and the world of the fathers are the same to Kafka, (p. 113; my em-
   phasis)
   Thus, no matter how we approach it—and this is Benjamin's "lesson"—
Kafka's work does not lend itself to domestication. It cannot be made into literature in the way one enters into religion. It resists on all levels, and it demandsat every obstacle and disruption that one simultaneously invents and experiences

                                 xiFOREWORD

in its unfolding-not merely a new rhetoric or a new mode of reading but a genuine "traversal of its writing" (Sellers) from which one does not emerge unscathed. It goes without saying that such a change of perspective—not satisfied
with reading, one experiences, travels, concretely transforms oneself—cannot
be conceived without a radical change in the very nature of the order of signs
that is at work in the text. Benjamin had more than an inkling of this decisive
aspect of Kafka's work when he attempted to account for the economy of his
short stories (for example, the "undecidable," "unfinished" character of his
work). Benjamin introduced the important notion of gesture. He may have borrowed the notion from Brecht, but for him it referred above all to a space where
the subject of the statement and the subject of enunciation can no longer be separated. Benjamin showed that Kafka could well have adopted Montaigne's phrase:
"Mon livre et moi ne faisons qu'un." It is impossible to separate the tool from
the artisan, the reader as lexeograph (Barthes) from the scriptor as subscriptor:
they are together as machine and rhizome, a network, an entangled knot of
movements and stops, of impulsions and immobilizations to experience interminably. They constitute what Deleuze and Guattari call a body without organs,
to experience and to deploy, according to the procedures, methods that are always new. Concerning the Kafkaesque gesture (in the medieval sense of the
word), Benjamin says:
  Kafka could understand things only in the form of a gestus, and this
  gestus which he did not understand constitutes the cloudy part of the
  parables. Kafka's writings [Dichtung] emanate from it. (p. 129)
    Nevertheless, Benjamin does not hesitate to advance hypotheses about the
"origin" of Kafka's literary "creation" (Dichtung). But rather than ascending to
some singular—transcendent—figure or signifier, it is a matter of defining a
space, a metastable force that does not refer to a subject but designates a vection,
a movement of translation that belongs to preindividual forces. These forces
seem to have already been traversed by an immemorial forgetfulness that makes
it impossible to reduce the saying to the said and that refers to an experience
for which only a collective enunciation can take responsibility. Recall the passage in which Benjamin brings out that aspect of things:
  What has been forgotten—and this insight affords us yet another ave-
  nue of access to Kafka's work—is never something purely individual.
  Everything forgotten mingles with what has been forgotten of the pre-
  historic world, forms countless, uncertain, changing compounds, yield-
  ing a constant flow of new, strange products. Oblivion is the container
  from which the inexhaustible intermediate world in Kafka's stories
  presses toward the light, (p. 131; my emphasis)

                                FOREWORD D xiii

   The reader of Deleuze and Guattari's book on Kafka will readily perceive that
they took it upon themselves to pick up the analysis of Kafka's work where
Benjamin-not because of a lack of perceptiveness but, perhaps, because of the
epistemological anchoring of his text-seemed to have reached an insurmountable barrier, a dead end. Despite his efforts, Benjamin was not always able to
avoid the stumbling block that he calls Kafka's "failure" and that he ultimately
characterizes in terms of a shortcoming (thereby being too quick to take literally
what was merely one threshold of Kafka's work):
   This document [the testament that orders the destruction of his works
   upon his death], which no one interested in Kafka can disregard, says
   that the writings did not satisfy their author, that he regarded his ef-
   forts as failures, that he counted himself among those who were bound
   to fail. He did fail in his grandiose attempt to convert poetry
   [Dichtung] into doctrine, to turn it into a parable and restore it to that
   stability and unpretentiousness which, in the face of reason, seemed to
   him to be the only appropriate thing for it. No other writer[Dichter]
   has obeyed the commandment "Thou shall not make unto thee a graven
   image" so faithfully, (p. 129)
   Without reading too much into the text, we can see a hint of nihilism that tilts
Kafka's work—otherwise very positive—in the direction of the literature of failure: not far removed from Camus and his philosophy of the absurd and of the
futility of every human work. Too human. But in writing Kafka, Deleuze and
Guattari propose an experimentation of Kafka that refrains from—even in the
name of a solemn gestus—referring to any idea of failure, of shortcoming, or
of "immemorial" guilt. This book represents a watershed and is invaluable for
the modern reader of Kafka: instead of seeking to capture his work in one of
the "segments" that constantly draw it toward some black hole, Oedipus, or failure (in short, nihilism), Deleuze and Guattari do their utmost to resist. They successfully show that although the different diabolical machines—letters, novellas,
and so-called unfinished novels—that Kafka created throughout his life do derive
from a gestus that is constantly running the risk of annihilation, destruction, or
regression, it is nonetheless wholly impossible to reduce the specific effects to
the nihilistic figures that we have enumerated in reference to Benjamin. For
Deleuze and Guattari, Kafka's work is characterized by the total absence of negation: above all, by a total absence of complacency (even in his journals) and
consequently a rejection of every problematic of failure. Those who read this
book carefully will perceive that the authors tried to show that Kafka's work is
in no way susceptible to an anthropological or psychological explanation but is
essentially the bearer of an affirmation without reserve.
    Without seeming to deal with the question at all, Deleuze and Guattari begin

                               xiv D FOREWORD

by detaching Kafka from what the academic institution calls "Literature." It
quickly becomes obvious that Kafka has been misinterpreted and, from a certain
point of view, "misunderstood" only because he has for a long time—too long,
according to the authors-been judged to be the embodiment of a concept of
literature (and of the Law—of Genre, of Desire) that is totally inapplicable to
his work. Deleuze and Guattari do not simply say that Kafka was unconcerned
with literature or that he was not a writer by occupation. Instead, they break
down the complex mechanism whose operation—because one is driven to
"categorize" it-leads precisely to failure: an always excessive reduction of his
work.
    By proposing the concept of "minor literature"—a concept that opens so many
new avenues of research in Europe and the United States—Deleuze and Guattari
give the modern reader a means by which to enter into Kafka's work without
being weighted down by the old categories of genres, types, modes, and style
(in the "linguistic" sense of the term, as Barthes would say). These categories
would imply that the reader's task is at bottom to interpret Kafka's writing,
whether the interpretation take the form of parabolism, negative theology, allegory, symbolism, "correspondences," and so on. The concept of minor literature permits a reversal: instead of Kafka's work being related to some preexistent
category or literary genre, it will henceforth serve as a rallying point or model
for certain texts and "bi-lingual"2 writing practices that, until now, had to pass
through a long purgatory before even being read, much less recognized.
    Why has it been necessary to introduce this category of minor literature to
account for Kafka's work? First, because Kafka, in his Diaries and "theoretical"
texts, meditated at length on the type of "literature" that he believed himself to
be inventing and that he saw certain of his contemporaries practicing. If we
reread Kafka's Diaries in light of what the authors bring out in this book, it immediately becomes apparent how important it was for Kafka to situate the type
of writing and rewriting he was practicing. Commentators have been too quick
to label as mystical (neurotic?) or metaphysical meditations that always took the
form of a radical questioning of classical or traditional literary writing. Kafka
does not read and admire Goethe and Flaubert to imitate them, much less to
move beyond(aufheben)em according to some ideological schema like that
of Hegel, but to determine and appreciate the incommensurable distance that
separates him from their ideal of depth or perfection. Writing against the current
and from a linguistic space that is radically heterogeneous with respect to his
great predecessors, Kafka appears as the initiator of a new literary continent:
a continent where reading and writing open up new perspectives, break ground
for new avenues of thought, and, above all, wipe out the tracks of an old topography of mind and thought. With Kafka—at least with the Kafka that Deleuze
and Guattari think through anew—one has the feeling that literature has been
given a new face: it has changed both its addresser and its addressee.

                                 FOREWORD D xv

   The new category of minor literature is also essential because it allows one
to dispense with dualisms and rifts—whether linguistic, generic, or even
political—that have ultimately constituted a sort of vulgate (a fortress, if you
will) that, although not indisputable, has been at least sufficiently restricting to
impede access to what has been characterized as Kafka's "epoch": Einstein and
his deterritorialization of the representation of the universe; the twelve-tone
Austrians and their deterritorializations of musical representation (Marie's death
cry in Wozzeck or that of Lulu); expressionist cinema and its double movement
of deterritorialization and reterritorialization of the image (Robert Wiene of
Czech origin, Fritz Lang born in Vienna, Paul Wegener and his use of themes
from Prague); the Copernican revolution of Freud; and finally, the linguistic
revolution carried out by the Prague circle. All the elements are brought together
for a radical change of episteme that Kafka contrives to transcribe with the most
diverse means, the most complex methods. The readers of this book—if they are
not in a hurry—will certainly be impressed by the extreme care that Deleuze and
Guattari have taken first in describing, and then in analyzing, the variety of those
methods. Whether it is a question of the relation of Kafka's texts to the German
language or to the economy of writing, the authors emphasize the procedures
that Kafka sets to work to produce the effect(s) that are linked to his name today:
the Kafka effect.
   It will come as no surprise to readers familiar with Deleuze and Guattari's
work that the idea of the machine producing effects is not used metaphorically
or symbolically but always in the most concrete sense. In his Dialogues with
Claire Parnet, Deleuze makes it more precise:
   "Machine, machinism, machinic": it is neither mechanical nor organic.
   The mechanical is a system of gradual connections between dependent
   terms. The machine, on the other hand, is a clustered "proximity" be-
   tween independent terms (topological proximity is itself independent of
   distance or contiguity). A machinic assemblage is defined by the dis-
   placement of a center of gravity onto an abstract line.3
From this perspective, we can more easily understand that there will always be
a "primary" social machine in relation to human beings and animals (within the
limits of what Deleuze calls its phylum): a gesture coming from the East will
always presuppose an Asiatic machine that without preceding it in time will condition the situations in which it can be concretely effected. But in the same way
that every mechanical element presupposes a social machine, the organism in
turn presupposes a body without organs that, by means of its lines (of flight),
its axes of intervention, and its "gradients," will largely exceed the ectodermal
limits of the human body as well as the psychological representatives of its
identity.
    For Deleuze and Guattari, if Kafka still occupies the place granted him in the

                                xvi D FOREWORD

history of letters, it has little or nothing to do with the fact that he renewed its
"themes" or transformed its style. Instead, they see him as important because he
figured out a mode of writing that allows us to account for the different
"machines" that condition our actual relation to the world, to the body, to desire,
and to the economy of life and death. And even if he has paredre—brothers of
blood and affection—he has no predecessor. Deleuze and Guattari are especially
interested in foregrounding some of the effects produced in relating ("classical")
literature and the minority machine in Kafka's work. It is not only a question of
tapping libidinal energy but also one of opening up new registers of thought and
action-of speed:
   This question of speed is important and very complicated as well. It
   doesn't mean to be the first to finish; one might be late by speed. Nor
   does it mean always changing; one might be invariable and constant by
   speed. Speed is to be caught in a becoming that is not a development
   or an evolution. One would have to be like a taxi, a waiting line, a
   line of flight, a bottleneck, a traffic jam, green and red lights, slight
   paranoia, difficult relations with the police. Being an abstract and bro-
   ken line, a zigzag that slips "between." (Dialogues, pp. 40-41)
   Thus, Kafka's work is revolutionary in the way it affects the language in
which it is effected. A language that is a "major" language is affected by a strong
deterritorialization factor and is subjected to a series of displacements that make
it slow down to a crawl in certain texts (contexts) (see, for example, "The
Metamorphosis") or send it into a panic, unfolding at a vertiginous pace (see one
of the short texts, like "The Cares of a Family Man"). For Kafka, therefore, it
is never a matter of "trafficking" in language or of mishandling it—how many
writers and poets have supposedly "subverted" language without ever having
caused the slightest ripple in comparison with the language of Kafka, Joyce, or
Kleist?-but of essentially proposing a new way of using it. This new usage in
effect short-circuits the appeal—within and by means of the "paper language"
that for Kafka is German—to a higher, dominant reality (transcendent or transcendental) that would function from within as a principle of subjectivization.
In Deleuzian terms, that new "language" (of a "logothete," as Barthes4 would
say) performs an "absolute deterritorialization of the cogito" by the processes
that it sets to work.5 If, according to Deleuze and Guattari, the principal strata
that bind and imprison the human being are "the organism, meaningfulness, interpretation, subjectivization, and subjection" (Mille Plateaux, p. 167), then
"minor" language is the instrument par excellence of that destratification.
    We can now better understand what separates Benjamin's "interpretation"
from the "course" taken in Deleuze and Guattari's book. What in Benjamin gives
way in a (blind? asymbolic?) gesture that refers to failure here takes the path
of an experimentation of life: the setting into place of a "field of continuous in-

                                FOREWORD D xvii

tensities" and of an "emission of sign-particles" that can no longer lead to failure
because the security of a subject is no longer necessary. The authors show that
referring Kafka's work to an idea of failure necessarily implies the full-fledged
return of literary and philosophical categories that presuppose a logical, even ontological, priority of content over form: "since the content is given in a given
form, one has to find, discover, or see the form of expression appropriate to it."
But with Kafka it turns out that this schema and this vection, which seem so natural, are radically put into question.
    In other words, if Kafka's watchword was really "Thou shall not make unto
thee a graven image," it was certainly not in the manner of the "Turks" or "Muslims" that Hegel describes in his Aesthetics—those people who "forbid the painting or reproduction of the human being or any living creature"6-and even less
like Plato—who in The Republic condemns art as the "greatest danger" or as
simulacrum: a simulacrum that leads those who do not possess the antidotes of
reason and knowledge (that is, animals, children, and the ignorant, as Kofman
reminds us) to lose track of the distinction between the sophist and the philosopher, between truth and illusion.
    According to the authors, it was because he liked children, animals, and the
"ignorant" that Kafka understood how to effect the strongest challenge to the wall
of censure erected by the history of literature. Like the animal that could never
really have a thought because it would simultaneously forget what it was on the
verge of thinking (a process Nietzsche discussed in his Untimely Meditations),
"minor" literature as reinvented by Kafka "begins by expressing itself and doesn't
conceptualize until afterward" (p. 28). With Kafka we are no longer confronted
by a "dialectic" or a "structural" correspondence between two kinds of
"forms"-forms of content, on the one hand, and ready-made forms of expression, on the other—but, in the authors' words, by a machine of expression that
is capable of disorganizing its own forms, of disorganizing the forms of content,
so as to free up an intense material of expression that is then made of pure content that can no longer be separated from its expression:
   Expression must break forms, encourage ruptures and new sproutings.
   When a form is broken, one must reconstruct the content that will
   necessarily be part of a rupture in the order of things. To take over, to
   anticipate, the material, (p. 28)
   Thus, the art (modern art in this sense) that Kafka tried to introduce is effectively no longer an art that proposes to "express" (a meaning), to "represent" (a
thing, a being), or to "imitate" (a nature). It is rather a method (of writing)—of
picking up, even of stealing: of "double stealing" as Deleuze sometimes says,
which is both "stealing" and "stealing away"—that consists in propelling the most
diverse contents on the basis of (nonsignifying) ruptures and intertwinings of the
most heterogeneous orders of signs and powers. The familial triangle, for exam-

                                xviii D FOREWORD

pie, is connected to other triangles (such as commercial, economic,
bureaucratic, and juridical ones), and thus the "individual concern" finds itself
linked directly to the political. According to Deleuze and Guattari, the second
principal characteristic of minor literature is that it is always political, not only
in the sense in which one speaks of politics, but specifically in the sense in which
further activity is no longer related to a unified instance, to an autonomous subjective substance that would be the origin of the choices we make, of the tastes
we have, and of the life we lead.
    In that sense, each and every gesture takes on a quasi-cosmic dimension. Benjamin says it well:
   Kafka does not grow tired of representing the gestus in this fashion,
   but he invariably does so with astonishment. . . . Experiments have
   proved that a man does not recognize his own walk on the screen or
   his own voice on the phonograph. The situation of the subject in such
   experiments is Kafka's situation; this is what directs him to learning,
   where he may encounter fragments of his own existence, fragments
   that are still within the context of the role. (p. 137)
 But it is with regard to the apparently "fragmentary" character of Kafkaesque ex-
 egeses that Deleuze and Guattari once again differ from Benjamin. Although
 Benjamin never tried to relate Kafka's work to a previous text or record that
 would allow one to "explain" it, his text does remain tacitly saturated with con-
 siderations that refer more or less directly to Jewish theology. Did Benjamin not
 write to Scholem in 1939 that "anybody who could see the comic sides of Jewish
 theology would at the same time have in hand the key to Kafka"?7
    In fact, at the end of his dense study of Kafka, when it is a matter of account-
 ing for the "law" of the work and bringing to light the internal principle that
 Kafka himself followed, Benjamin refers to the loss of the Holy Writ. Kafka's
 work somehow remains enigmatic, his life and attitude incomprehensible and
 mysterious: "Kafka, however, has found the law of his journey-at least on one
 occasion he succeeded in bringing its breathtaking speed in line with the slow
 narrative pace that he presumably sought all his life" (p. 139).
    Seen from a certain angle, Deleuze and Guattari's book on Kafka represents
 the annulment of such a question because-as they to their best to show-if there
is one thing that should be avoided besides the natural (psychoanalytic) explana-
 tion and the supernatural (theological) one, it is the temptation to draw Kafka
 toward the "individual concern," the tragic (that is, toward personal psychology,
 neurosis, or an author's individual tastes). Neither allegory, metaphor, nor the-
 ology will sum up a work that has explored them all without letting itself be
 taken over by any single one. But, above all, neither the transcendence of the
 law, the internalization of guilt, nor the subjectivity of the enunciation can ever
 give an adequate account of the intrinsic force of Kafka's work.

                                 FOREWORD
                                        xix

    Far from relating this work to an interior drama, an intimate tribunal, or
something else drawn from the same old grab bag, Deleuze and Guattari ask us
to be attentive to the labor of the "dismantling" or demolition of forms and categories that determine the "great literature" in Kafka. A calm dismantling—one
would be tempted to say "pacific"—that first takes the form of an "a priori elimination of every idea of guilt": there are certainly many "guilty" characters in
Kafka, and with an extremely strong and deleterious guilt, but Kafka never takes
that guilt for granted. On the contrary, it appears at each moment as the effect
of an assemblage, of a machine if you will, that indirectly takes up lawyers,
judges, and the victims in the same movement. As Deleuze and Guattari write:
"Culpability is never anything but the superficial movement whereby judges and
even lawyers confine you in order to prevent you from engaging in a real
movement-that is, from taking care of your own affairs" (p. 45). So much for
culpability.
    The dismantling mentioned above has a second aspect, and this one is decisive in confronting the reading proposed by Deleuze and Guattari with that of
Benjamin: "even if the law remains unrecognizable, this is not because it is hidden by its transcendence, but simply because it is always denuded of any interiority: it is always in the office next door, or behind the door, on to infinity" (p.
45). It is very easy to see the implications that such a hypothesis entails in regard
to theology (whether Jewish or another). The law is not stated in accord with
its ("sham") transcendence, but the opposite occurs: "it is the statement, the
enunciation, that constructs the law in the name of an immanent power of the
one who enounces it—the law is confused with that which the guardian utters,
and the writings precede the law, rather than being the necessary and derived
expression of it" (p. 45). Transcendence of the law, the interiority of guilt, and
the subjectivity of enunciation are the three "themes" that, according to Deleuze
and Guattari, have misled readers and made access to Kafka's work difficult if
 not impossible, for it becomes inevitably a matter of relating the complexity to
his "genius," to the "mystery" of his existence, as in the relationship of the Haggadah to the Halaka, which Benjamin mentions in his text on Kafka.8 In delving
 into the "methods" and the processes that Kafka uses to revoke the law's mystery
and relate it to the places of its enuncation, and in describing them with preci-
 sion, Deleuze and Guattari make way for—perhaps for the first time-a "joyous"
 reading of Kafka: a Gaya Scienza of Kafka's work.
    Free of the "three most tiresome themes" of the interpretation of the law,
Deleuze and Guattari are led to propose a conception of the relation of law to
desire that allows them to call into question all the ambiguities and semiobscuri-
 ties that weigh down all the commentaries on Kafka's work. For them, since the
law that is constantly referred to in Kafka no longer lends itself to an anthropological or theological explanation, the entire economy of that strange "work,"
and in particular its relation to desire (of writing, reading, and loving), has to

                                 xx D FOREWORD

be reinterpreted. And not only has the nature of the law been "misinterpreted,"
but the status and role of desire in Kafka's work have not fared any better.
Deleuze and Guattari are the first to underscore the importance and force of desire in Kafka. As they reveal, this desire cannot be placed in a relation (of dependence) with a lack or even with the law in general, with a localized natural reality (the substantial "object" of my desire), or with worldly pleasure (above all
the "carnivalesque"). As Deleuze and Guattari say in an essential passage in this
book: "where one believed there was the law, there is in fact desire and desire
alone. Justice is desire and not law" (p. 49).
    One can guess the consequences they will draw from such premises: since
desire is the effective "operator" of an assemblage where everybody—officials,
judges, lawyers, artists, men, women, and so forth—is held, it becomes obvious
why neither a lack nor a privation (of a transcendent meaning, for example)
gives or causes desire; on the contrary, one can lack something only in relation
to an assemblage from which one is excluded, but one desires only as a function
of an assemblage where one is included: if only, as Deleuze says, in an "association of banditry or revolt" (Dialogues, p. 25).
    Thus, we can better understand what was lacking in Benjamin's attempt to
reach an interpretation by means of gesture or the Talmud: by making law into
a substance and desire (for justice) into an exigency that, if not transcendent,
is external to the assemblage where every subject is only one piece of a complex
montage, he has to hypostatize a nature of justice and of the law. He also has
to derive desire from a lack or a law that transcends the subject or, if you will,
from a law that the subject has "forgotten" and that is waiting to reemerge into
the light.9 According to Deleuze and Guattari, conversely, if justice doesn't lend
itself to representation, it is not because justice is inaccessible or mysteriously
hidden, but because it is desire:
   Desire could never be on a stage where it would sometimes appear
   like a party opposed to another party (desire against the law), some-
   times like the presence of the two sides under the effect of a superior
   law that would govern their distribution and their combination, (p. 50)
Thus, the following conclusion is drawn:
   If everything, everyone, is part of justice, if everyone is an auxiliary
   of justice, from the priest to the little girls, this is not because of the
   transcendence of the law but because of the immanence of desire.
   (p.50)
   This last version—very Kafkaesque—of the avatars and metamorphoses of
desire reveals that for Kafka there is never any need for a representative to intercede between him and his desire, just as there is no need for an intermediary
between the "work" of the text and the reader. Because it is immanent, the desire

                                FOREWORD D xxi

that traverses Kafka's work doesn't even require what Benjamin, in referring to
Father Malebranche (!), claims for Kafka himself: for instance, the possession
of attentiveness, "the natural prayer of the soul." On the contrary, Kafka knew
that to find justice—the justice that he was seeking, that traversed him—it was
necessary to move, to go from one room to another, from office to office, from
language to language, and from country to country, always following his desire.
    To find the "key" to Kafka's work, Deleuze and Guattari haven't sought to interpret it; they didn't seek to relate it to some single, transcendent law. Like K.,
the man of the immanent quest following the line of infinite flight, they have
tried to grapple with the extraordinary machine of expression that Kafka set to
work and have taken up the task of rewriting the quest to infinity, interminably.
In reading this short but very dense book, we find, in place of infinite exegesis,
a reading of Kafka's work that is practical: "continuum of desire, with shifting
limits that are always displaced" (p. 51). It is this procedure in action, this continuous process, and this field of immanence that Deleuze and Guattari have
tried to help us traverse with a Kafka freed from his interpreters.

Translator's Introduction

           Reading a text is never a scholarly exercise in search of what is
           signified, still less a highly textual exercise in search of a signifer.
           Rather, it is a productive use of the literary machine, a montage
           of desiring machines, a schizoid exercise that extracts from the
           text its revolutionary force.
                         — Deleuze and Guattari, Anti-Oedipus
How to translate Kafka by Deleuze and Guattari? Perhaps one way to answer
this necessary question would be to make a detour through another question, the
apparent simplicity of which actually connects to a whole complex panoply of
questions about the functions and uses of critical theory today, about the ties of
literary analysis and philosophical investigation, about the very status of writing
in contemporary thought and practice. This second question: why translate
Kafka1?
    Against the ease of a Sir Edmund Hillary sort of answer—"Because it's
there"—I want to suggest that to construct an effective translation of the text, we
need to reflect on the role(s) of Kafka, of the energy it can possess for readers
in varying situations, in varying emplacements and inscriptions within the fields
of knowledge today. For the question of translation is also a question of politics
and audience: for whom should this book be translated, and to what end?
    Immediately, then, a first answer: Kafka is not a book designed for the usual
purposes of what we might term the Kafka-specialist—or at least not for that specialist insofar as he or she remains a specialist, a disciplinary force who reter-

                      TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION D xxiii

ritorializes the openness of a writing (in this case Kafka's) onto the facts of a
life, the teleology of a biography frequently studied in itself and cut off from
all exteriorities. Indeed, there seems at first glance to be little here that could
interest the scholar-specialist, that could add new information to his or her pool
of authorial knowledge. To be sure, Deleuze and Guattari's evident debt to an
existential phenomenology in which style is understood to be an energetic and
total investment of an author's (political) being-in-the-world means that Kafka
can bear a certain resemblance to the traditional study of an author as some kind
of necessary and transparent linking up of life and art in a univocally causal
fashion.
    But Kafka is not a book of life explaining art, or vice versa. To be sure, there
is a certain teleology as Deleuze and Guattari narrate a turn in Kafka from short
story to novel as an attempt to resolve certain problems. But contrary to, say,
Sartre, who inlafamlllepresents the literary developments in a biography as a supreme solutionoflife(in this case
Flaubert's hang-ups with Dad), Deleuze and Guattari don't see writing as a solution to the interiorized problems of an individual psychology. Rather, writing
stands against psychology, against interiority, by giving an author a possibility
of becoming more than his or her nominal self, of trading the insistent solidity
of the family tree for the whole field of desire and history. The romance of the
individual life is exceeded, deterritorialized, escaped. Only in this sense is Kafka
"about" Kafka.
    At the extreme, the book may even seem a failure in the eyes of the traditional
literary critic's defense of the organic integrity, coherence, and complexity of
the authorial career; hence, the dismissive review by Guy Scarpetta in, of all
places, Tel Quel—a journal one might have assumed to have little need for investment in old(er) mythologies of the author, although the journal's recent reincarnation as a born-again Christian journal might suggest retrospectively the extent to which the journal was always already tied to an ideology of the Author
and His Word. For Scarpetta, Kafka"failure" (the term is his) comes from its
reduction of a whole career to a single philosophic force-from its desire to
"present texts as 'examples' (if not as 'symptoms') instead of analyzing the process they engage in" (Scarpetta 1975, 49).
    Precisely. Except for his attribution to Deleuze and Guattari of the term
symptom, which they would probably disavow as being too indebted to an ideology of interpretation, as a dive into the hermeneutic depths, Scarpetta (no matter
how critically) seems to capture something of the Deleuze-Guattari project, of
their particular stance toward the individual author. We might say that for them,
Kafka is really a pretext, no more, or less, than one of the many ways to enter
into the field of history, to find oneself (or one's many selves, to refer to the
way that Deleuze and Guattari describe their collaboration at the beginning of
Milles Plateaux) carried away on one of history's many, many lines of escape.

                       xxiv D TRANSLATOR'S      INTRODUCTION

Indeed, the layering, connective, montagist entity called Milles Plateaux already
seems to be germinating in Kafka, where the discussion of the nominal subject
always seems to be taking place in conjunction with—or as Deleuze and Guattari
might say, in adjacency with—a whole array of other subjects: Sacher-Masoch,
Orson Welles, Marcel Proust, Samuel Beckett, and James Joyce, to name just
a few.
    To be sure, it is not the case that the book is not about Kafka, and it demonstrates a certain concern for that kind of comprehensiveness of research that
traditional criticism demands in the study of a life; Deleuze and Guattari have
gone through the full range of the primary texts and have covered the essential
secondary literature. Their reading of Kafka seems to stand as a challenge to
previous readings of Kafka—especially to that present reading of Kafka as a misanthrope of negativity, a case of Oedipalized neurosis, a refugee into the interiority of subjectivity as against the collective enunciation of mass political action.
And, no doubt, the Deleuze-Guattari reading of Kafka as man of joy, as promoter of a radical politics, as rejecter of all submissions to the ostensible ties
of family and neurosis could no doubt become part of the canon of the Kafka
discipline.
    However, throughout Kajka, Deleuze and Guattari argue that such a reading
goes beyond specializations and disciplinary boundaries. Indeed, by treating
previous readings of Kafka as forms of reterritorialization of a nomadic writing,
Deleuze and Guattari suggest how the seeming integrity of academic specialization is actually an alibi for an inevitable exploitation of literary criticism to political ends. Thus, although Deleuze and Guattari's reading of bent head-straightened head images as processes of submission and defiance, as against Marthe
Robert's reading of such images as signifiers of "impossible quests," can seem
like the sort of interpretative quibble from within that so often characterizes
literary criticism, one of the longest footnotes of Kafka, on the changing history
of communist attitudes toward Kafka, emphasizes how all readings—including
by retrospective implication Marthe Robert's seemingly innocent one—are political practices that can contain and constrain, impel and empower. In the cartography of desire and history, the smallest quibble immediately opens onto the
whole map of political struggle in all its complex dimensions. Not that literary
criticism is in any way a metaphor for larger struggles; rather, it is a place of
such struggles. Notions of larger and smaller become inappropriate and come
to be replaced by the possibility of a micropolitics where everything is immediately and necessarily contiguous with everything else.
    It is as if the book before us is only one version, one twist of the kaleidoscope
(to use an image from Guattari), of an infinitely permutating, connecting process
in which the single event-here, the life of Kafka—is never more than one step
in a larger process. Some of the other versions seem bracketed out by the provisional or initial centering of this book on Kafka—indeed, the discussion of

                       TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION D xxv

Sacher-Masoch literally takes place inside a set of parentheses that typographically set it off from the rest of the book—but Kafkastill seems specifically nomadic, its own writing echoing that opening up, which Deleuze and Guattari impute to Kafka, of any single event to the whole force of history. Kafka becomes
an example, one case within a typology of cases. Even in a book that bears his
name, Kafka has no more, or less, ultimate privilege than any other subject. (We
might compare this to the strategic process of Deleuze'LTmage-Mouvementn
which the "tres belle oeuvre" of horror director Mario Bava has an equal standing with the work of Bergman or Bergson.) In this sense, Kafka participates in
that process of equalization of human phenomena implicit in the semiotic enterprise undertaken by Deleuze and Guattari, an enterprise that Deleuze suggests
has as its role to "be nothing more than a study of regimes, of their differences,
and their transformations" (Deleuze 1977, 127).
    Franz Kafka, Sigmund Freud, David Hume, Francis Bacon, Sam Fuller, and
so on—whatever the particular subject at any particular moment of Deleuze and
Guattari's semiotic, whether this subject is still locked into older ideologies of
lack, of repression (as Deleuze and Guattari argue is the case with Freud, Lacan,
and their followers) or whether the subject is, in Edward Said's term, between
system and culture and so able to anticipate the political currents of the future
(as Deleuze and Guattari argue is the case with the nomads like Kafka, Beckett,
and Nicholas Ray)—in all cases, the figures share in desire, in expression, in
the razor's edge confrontation of territorialization, deterritorialization, and reterritorialization. Semiotic equalization, then, doesn't mean indiscrimination, an
anarchic or existentialist acceptance of all practices as a justifiable assumption
of one's own freedom. Deleuze and Guattari obviously do evaluate, do believe
that certain practices stand a better chance of opening up to multiplicity. They
prefer their Kafka to Marthe Robert's; as Deleuze explains, the goal of their
reading process is to "bring to an author a little of this joy, this amorous political
life that he knew how to offer, how to invent. So many dead writers must have
wept over what was written about them. I hope that Kafka enjoyed the book that
we wrote about him" (Deleuze 1977, 142).
    In a sense, if the biographical Kafka hadn't existed, Deleuze and Guattari
could have invented him or found another version of his semiotic elsewhere.
Thus, one doesn't translate for the specialist. One translates for the deterritorializing critic who, to use a term that Deleuze uses to describe his and Guattari's
procedure, engages in a "pickup" of ideas (Deleuze 1977), a gathering here and
there of desires, of wills, of energies. The translation aims to continue that picking up offor all sorts of purposes other than the study of Kafka in particular. Among the recent work in-spired by Kajka, I would cite "A White Heron"
and the Question of Minor Literature, Louis Renza's study of the minority position in American letters of the provincial, female writer (Renza 1984), and R6da
Bensmaia's "Amour bilingue de Khatibi," a commentary on the dialogic practice

                      xxvi D TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

of a Maghrebian writing that may undo French from within (Bensmai'a 1985).
These writings use Deleuze and Guattari's book to theorize all sorts of differential practices of writing and to suggest how placing any minority writer within
a major language can turn into a battle of the most far-reaching sort.
    Not that one should applaud any use of Kafka whatsoever. Already, some of
the American critical adulation of other Deleuze-Guattari texts, especially AntiOedipus, suggests how quickly a politics of the rhizomatic can assuage the unhappy guilty conscience of the depoliticized intellectual by offering him or her
the alibi of a process in which everything one does can be something that one
can pretend is politically engaged. The notion of the rhizome as an endless pattern in which everything is linked to everything else can lead to a slide from a
notion like the Leninist one of struggle as a calculated engagement with the
weakest link in the chain to a kind of anarcho-voluntarist fantasy that every link
is, in every place and time, equally weak, equally appropriate as a point of application for one's critical energies. Dangerously, despite all the efforts of Deleuze
and Guattari to deconstruct hierarchies, American literary criticism may treat
them the way it has generally treated Mikhail Bakhtin (in many ways a very
similar sort of thinker)—not as theorists of the ties of collective enunciation and
minor literature but as aesthetes of a high-culture avant-garde closed in on its
own fetishes of interiority. Deleuze and Guattari themselves admit that there is
a fine line between territorializing and deterritorializing processes, and it is easy
for their work to be appropriated to the most divergent and even contradictory
of ends. One hopes that a translation of Kafka will be something that readers
will question, as well as use.
    It is necessary to keep watch over the ways in which what Deleuze and Guattari present as progressive deterritorializations may necessitate simultaneous
reterritorializations in other sites of the rhizome. Most especially, as Alice
Jardine has pointed out, the lines of escape tend to be especially open to privileged male figures; for all their talk of a devenir-femme, a becoming-woman,
Deleuze and Guattari tend to abstract this process away from any tie to the
historically specific situation and struggle of women. Men get a chance to take
flight from their entrapment, but women get no chance at all except to be perfectly invisible in the flow of the discourse (Jardine 1985). A picking up of
Deleuze and Guattari, then, would have to examine not only what they enable
but also what they disenable, what they close off. Deleuze and Guattari's throwaway references to Kafka's schizo-incest with the sister may well promote the
male writer's rejection of an Oedipal triangulation for the sake of a certain polymorphous perversity, but they can also elide the sister's place in all of this: to
what extent might not Franz's (or Deleuze and Guattari's) need for a deterritorialization of the Kafka-machine require a certain reterritorialization of the
sister-her reification into a myth of Femininity as a kind of succoring aid to
the adventuring male in his quest to go beyond limits?

                     TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION D xxvii

    This means that Kafka shouldn't stand as a static collection of polished, finished ideas or mythologies or ideologies that one would pick up for their precision and ready-made profundity. If Kafka escapes from allegiance to a Kafkalife, the depths of a romance of Kafka the man, this escape should not lead to
the assumption that one can ever fully escape to something else, to a final point
at the end of a line. In a sense, Kafka can do what Deleuze and Guattari say that
Kafka was doing; each moment in the writing is only a sort of room that one
can leave by going through a door, only to arrive in another room that one won't
stay in and that has doors that, in turn, lead to other rooms. Hence, I attempt
in this translation to reiterate (I avoid saying "reproduce," a word too tied to a
mimesis) a flow of Deleuze and Guattari's text. Even though it is possible
throughout the text for a reader to believe that he or she catches the real and
full sense beneath the frequently allusive, elusive movement of the arguments,
the translation doesn't attempt in any way to fill out the book, to help the multiplicities of things left unsaid take on the form of emphatic, authoritative
statements.
    Even the key words of the Deleuze-Guattari procedure, words like rhizome,
lines of escape, assemblage (agencement),ecome battle-sites for a process of
deterritorialization as the authors violate their own proprietary authorship of
terms and make the words tremble, stutter. For example, while Deleuze and
Guattari initially seem to be getting at something systematic, that is, fixed and
rationalized, in a distinction between proces (which we might want to translate
not only as "process" but also as "trial," as in the French title for Kafka's The
Trial, a kind of processing) and processus (which we might be able to translate
as "procedure"), the boundaries between the two give way. Seeming to refer to
fixed conceptual fields, the words seem initially territorialized, literally the
guardians of two inviolate and irrevocably distinct conceptual realms. But a
kind of sliding contagion occurs, and through the course of the book, each term
comes to refer to elements within the original territorial space of the other term.
So, to a large extent, the translation lets the words slide-proces and processus
interpenetrate, each engaging in unsystematic war-marchine attacks on the
other.
    Again, as part of the nonspecialist quality of the book, the languag
is a language that glides between a number of accepted discourses, and it is again
as an answer to the questions of translation that this translation works to convey
a sense of the fields from which Deleuze and Guattari draw some of their terminology. Most important, the attempt to redefine the nature of the author leads
Deleuze and Guattari to foray into the recent work in linguistics inspired by
Emile Benveniste on the conditions of linguistic enunciation. Benveniste's distinction between the denoted message in a text (its enounced content) and the
message that every text gives about the conditions under which it was enounced
serves Deleuze and Guattari in their attempt to show how the politics of a Kafka-

                     xxviii D TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

writing lie not only in what he says, or even in how what he says reveals a psychology of the author, but in the effects that the writing establishes in being
 written-in, for example, locking into the historical currents that are knocking
 at the door of the lone author's study. The English reader should know then that
 the discussions of enunciation here take part in a larger French discussion of sig-
 nificance as residing as much in the performative aspects of language as in its
 referential ones. (See, for example, the entire issue of the important semiotics
journal Communications that is devoted to the question of "Cinema and Enuncia-
 tion" [1983].) In line with the forthcoming translation ofMilles Plateaux, I have
translated Benveniste's terms as "enunciation"(enonciation)and as "statement"
 (enonce), although readers should keep in mind the ambiguities of this latter
 translation choice in comparison with Benveniste's essentially and deliberately
univocal term, the enonce being precisely that myth of a fixed, dictionary like
content to a message.
    In only one way, perhaps, have I made use of the Kafka discipline; most of
the translations of the citations from Kafka come from the standard Muir translations. Although Joyce Crick suggests that the Muirs tended to translate Kafka
as a writer of bleak negativity (Crick 1980), and although the French translation
seems to express more of that virtually carnivalesque joy that Deleuze and Guattari read in Kafka, it seemed to me that the inscription of the Muir version within
the Deleuze-Guattari text might already encourage that kind of active escaping
that Deleuze and Guattari work to establish for Kafka. That is, the presence of
a territorializing voice—the Muir's version of Kafka as an insistently misanthropic, isolated poor soul—increases the gamble of Deleuze and Guattari's project. Like the emphatic reductiveness of the French Communist party's (in)fa-
 mous "Faut-il bruler Kafka?" ("Should we burn Kafka?"), the bleak univocality
 of the Muir version of Kafka increases the intensity of the struggle and shows how
much is at stake in Deleuze and Guattari's attempt to constitute literary criticism
as one of the most advanced branches of the Joyful Science.
    I wish to thank the following people for assistance in the preparation of this
manuscript: Professor Clark Muenzer of the University of Pittsburgh for bibliographic and citational information on some of the texts by and on Kafka; and
Drs. Pradheep Sindhu and Marie-Francoise Bertrand of Palo Alto for computer
assistance and support.

                                                                              D.P.

                         TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION D xxix

                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bensmai'a, Reda. "Traduire ou 'blanchir' la langue:mourilinguAbdelkebir Khatibi
    Cadre 3 (Spring 1985): 187-206.
Communicatioinemaat983).
Crick, Joyce. "Kafka and the Muirs." In The World of Franz Kafka, edited by J. P. Stern, 159-97.
    New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1980.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Claire Parnetaris: Flammarion, 1977.
Jardine, Alice. "Deleuze and His Br(others)." Sub-Stance 13, No. 3-4 (1984):46-60.
Renza, Louis. "A White Heron" and the Question of Minor Literature. Milwaukee: University of
    Wisconsin Press, 1984.
Scarpetta, Guy. Revieafkby Deleuze and Guattari.Telutumn 1975):48-49.

This page intentionally left blank

Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 1
Content and Expression

How can we enter into Kafka's work? This work is a rhizome, a burrow. The
castle has multiple entrances whose rules of usage and whose locations aren't
very well known. The hotel in Amerika has innumerable main doors and side
doors that innumerable guards watch over; it even has entrances and exits without doors. Yet it might seem that the burrow in the story of that name has only
one entrance; the most the animal can do is dream of a second entrance that
would serve only for surveillance. But this is a trap arranged by the animal and
by Kafka himself; the whole description of the burrow functions to trick the
enemy. We will enter, then, by any point whatsoever; none matters more than
another, and no entrance is more privileged even if it seems an impasse, a tight
passage, a siphon. We will be trying only to discover what other points our entrance connects to, what crossroads and galleries one passes through to link two
points, what the map of the rhizome is and how the map is modifed if one enters
by another point. Only the principle of multiple entrances prevents the introduction of the enemy, the Signifier and those attempts to interpret a work that is
actually only open to experimentation.
   We'll start with a modest way in-that of The Castle's inn parlor where K discovers the portrait of a porter with his head bent, his chin sunk into his chest.
These two elements —the portrait or the photo, and the beaten and bent head—
are constant in Kafka, although there are varying degrees of autonomy of one
from the other. The photo of the parents in Amerika. The portrait of the woman
in fur in "The Metamorphosis" (there an actual mother has a bent head, and an
actual father wears a porter's uniform). Proliferation of photos and portraits in

                                        3

                         4 D CONTENT AND EXPRESSION

The Trial from Fraulein Burstner's room to Titorelli's studio. The bent head that
one can no longer raise appears all the time in the letters, in the Notebooks, in
the Diaries, in the stories, and also in The Trial where the judges have their
backs bent against the ceiling, against some of the assistants, the executioner,
the priest and so on. Thus, the entrance we have chosen not only promises to
connect with things that we hope will eventually appear in the work but is itself
constituted by the connecting of two relatively independent forms, the form of
content (the bent head) and the form of expression (portrait-photo), which reunite at the beginning of The Castle. We aren't interpreting them. We would
simply say that this reunion causes a functional blockage, a neutralization of experimental desire-the untouchable, unkissable, forbidden, enframed photo that
can only take pleasurefrom its own sight, like that desire blocked by the
roof or the ceiling, a submissive desire that can only take pleasure from its own
submission. And also the desire that imposes submission, propagates it; a desire
that judges and condemns (like the father in "The Judgment" who so bends his
head that his son has to kneel before him). Memory of an Oedipal childhood?
The memory is a family portrait or a vacation photo showing men with bent
heads, women with their necks circled by a ribbon.' The memory blocks desire,
makes mere carbon copies of it, fixes it within strata, cuts it off from all its connections. But what, then, can we hope for? It's an impasse. Nonetheless, we can
realize that even an impasse is good if it forms part of the rhizome.
    The head that straightens, the head that bursts through the roof or the ceiling,
seems an answer to the bent head. We find it everywhere in Kafka.2 In The Castle, the portrait of the porter is matched by the evocation of the hometown
church steeple that "firm in line, soarfedj unfalteringly to its tapering point"
(even the tower of the castle, as a machine of desire, evokes the melancholy,
mad movement of an inhabitant who would have risen by breaking through the
roof)- Yet isn't the image of the small-town steeple still a memory? Actually,
it no longer acts as such. Rather, it acts as a childhood block, and not as a childhood memory, strengthening desire instead of cramping it, displacing it in time,
deterritorializing it, proliferating its connections, linking it to other intensities
(thus, as a block, the tower-steeple connects to two other scenes, that of the
teacher and of the children whose words are incomprehensible, and that of the
displaced, redressed, or reversed family scene in which it is the adults who play
around in the tub). But that's not important. What's important is the light music,
or, more precisely, the pure and intense sound emanating from the steeple and
the castle tower: "a bell began to ring merrily up there, a bell that for at least
a second made his heart palpitate for its tone was menacing, too, as if it threatened him with the fulfillment of his vague desire. This great bell soon died away,
however, and its place was taken by a feeble, monotonous little twinkle." It's curious how the intrusion of sound often occurs in Kafka in connection with the
movement to raise or straighten the head—Josephine the mouse, the young musi-

                         CONTENT AND EXPRESSION D 5

cal dogs ("Everything was music, the lifting and setting down of their
feet. . . . the symmetrical patterns which they produced by one dog setting his
front paws on the back of another and the rest following suit . . . They were
walking on their hind legs.")- The distinction between two states of desire appears especially in "The Metamorphosis" when, on the one hand, Gregor glues
himself to the portrait of the woman in fur and bends his head toward the door
in a desperate attempt to hold onto something in his room (which is being emptied out), and when, on the other hand, Gregor leaves this room, guided by the
vibrating sound of the violin, and tries to grab onto the uncovered neck of his
sister (who has stopped wearing collars or ribbons ever since she lost her social
standing). Is this the difference between a plastic and still Oedipal incest with
a maternal photo and a schizo incest with the sister and the light music that
emerges strangely from it? Music always seems caught up in an indivisible
becoming-child or becoming-animal, a sonorous block that opposes the visual
memory. "Please turn out the light, I can only play in the dark. / straighten
myself.W could well believe that these are two new forms: the straightened
head is a form of content, and the musical sound is a form of expression. Shall
we represent all this through the following equations?
   bent head             _    a blocked, oppressed or oppressing, neutral-
   portrait-photo             ized desire, with a minimum of connection,
                              childhood memory, territoriality or reter-
                              ritorialization.

   straightened head     _    a desire that straightens up or moves for-
   musical sound              ward, and opens up to new connections,
                              childhood block or animal block, deterrito-
                              rialization.
   But that's not really right. It is certainly not a systematized music, a musical
form, that interests Kafka (in his letters and in his diary, one finds nothing more
than insignificant anecdotes about a few musicians). It isn't a composed and
semiotically shaped music that interests Kafka, but rather a pure sonorous material. If one counts the main scenes of sonorous intrusions, one arrives approximately at the following list: the John Cage-like concert in Description of a
Struggle where the supplicant (1) wants to play the piano because he is feeling
happy; (2) doesn't know how to play; (3) doesn't play at all ("At that moment
two gentlemen seized the bench and, whistling a song and rocking me to and
fro, carried me far away from the piano to the dining table"); and (4) is congratulated for having played so well. In the "Investigations of a Dog," the musical
dogs produce a tremendous racket, but no one can tell how they do it, since they
don't speak, sing, or bark but make the music swell up out of nothingness. In
"Josephine the Singer, or the Mouse Folk," it is unlikely that Josephine really

                          6 D CONTENT AND EXPRESSION

sings; she only whistles in a way that is no better than any other mouse, perhaps
even worse, but in such a manner that the mystery of her nonexistent art becomes even greater. In Amerika, Karl Rossman plays too quickly or too slowly,
ridiculously, and feels "rising within him a song which reachfes] past the end
of this song." In "The Metamorphosis," sound intervenes at first as a faint whining that captures Gregor's voice and blurs the resonance of words; and then,
even though she's a musician, the sister manages to do no more than pluck at
her violin, bothered by the shadow of the boarders.
    These examples sufficiently show that in the realm of expression, sound is
not opposed to the portait, as the straightened head was opposed to the bent head
in the realm of content. If we consider the two forms of content abstractly, there
is undeniably a simple formal opposition between them, a binary relation, a
structural or semantic quality that scarcely lets us out of the realm of the signifier
and that is more a dichotomy than a rhizome. But whereas the portait, for its
part, is undeniably a form of expression that corresponds to a form of the content
"bent head," this is not so for sound. What interests Kafka is a pure and intense
sonorous material that is always connected to its own abolition—a deterritorialized musical sound, a cry that escapes signification, composition, song,
words—a sonority that ruptures in order to break away from a chain that is still
all too signifying. In sound, intensity alone matters, and such sound is generally
monotone and always nonsignifying; thus, in The Trial, the monotone cry of a
warder who is being punished "did not seem to come from a human being but
from some martyred instrument."4 As long as there is form, there is still reterritorialization, even in music. In contrast, all of Josepine's art consists in the fact
that, not knowing more than the other mice how to sing, she perhaps enacts a
deterritorialization of "the usual piping" and liberates it from "the cares of daily
life." In short, sound doesn't show up here as a form of expression, but rather
as an unformed material of expression, that will act on the other terms. On the
one hand, it serves to express contents that will reveal themselves to be relatively
less and less formalized; thus, the head that straightens up ceases to matter in
itself and becomes formally no more than a deformable substance swept away
by the flow of sonorous expression. As Kafka has the ape in "A Report to an
Academy" say, it isn't a question of a well-formed vertical movement toward the
sky or in front of one's self, it is no longer a question of breaking through the
roof, but of intensely going"head over heels and away,"no matter where, even
without moving; it isn't a question of liberty as against submission, but only a
question of a line of escape or, rather, of a simple way out, "right, left or in any
direction," as long as it is as little signifying as possible. On the other hand, the
firmest and most resistant formalizations—for example, those on the order of the
portrait or the bent head—will themselves lose their rigidity in order to proliferate or prepare an upheaval in which they fall into new lines of intensity (even
the curved backs of the judges emit a sonorous cracking that pushes the issue

                         CONTENT AND EXPRESSION D 7

of Justice out of the picture; and photos and pictures proliferate in The Trial to
take on a new function). Kafka's drawings, the old men and the silhouettes that
he liked to draw, emphasize figures with bent heads, straightened heads, and
head over heels and away. Take a look at the reproductions in the Kafka issue
of Obliques.
    We won't try to find archetypes that would represent Kafka's imaginary, his
dynamic, or his bestiary (the archetype works by assimilation, homogenization,
and thematics, whereas our method works only where a rupturing and hetereogenous line appears). Moreover, we aren't looking for any so-called free associations (we are all well aware of the sad fate of these associations that always
bring us back to childhood memories or, even worse, to the phantasm, not because they fail to work but because such a fate is part of their actual underlying
principle). We aren't even trying to interpret, to say that this means that.5 And
we are looking least of all for a structure with formal oppositions and a fully
constructed Signifier; one can always come up with binary oppositions like "bent
head-straightened head" or "portrait-sonority" and bi-univocal relations like
"bent head-portrait" or "straightened head-sonority." But that's stupid as long as
one doesn't see where the system is coming from and going to, how it becomes,
and what element is going to play the role of heterogeneity, a saturating body
that makes the whole assembly flow away and that breaks the symbolic structure, no less than it breaks hermeneutic interpretation, the ordinary association
of ideas, and the imaginary archetype. Because we don't see much difference
among all these things (who could tell what the difference is between a structural, differential opposition and an imaginary archetype whose role is to
differentiate itself?). We believe only in a Kafkathat is neither imaginary nor symbolic. We believe only in one or more Kafka machines that are neither structure nor phantasm. We believe only in a Kafka experimentation that
is without interpretation or significance and rests only on tests of experience:
"I am not appealing for any man's verdict, I am only imparting knowledge, I am
only making a report. To you also, honored Members of the Academy, I have
only made a report."6 A writer isn't a writer-man; he is a machine-man, and an
experimental man (who thereby ceases to be a man in order to become an ape
or a beetle, or a dog, or mouse, a becoming-animal, a becoming-inhuman, since
it is actually through voice and through sound and through a style that one becomes an animal, and certainly through the force of sobriety).
    A Kafka-machine is thus constituted by contents and expressions that have
been formalized to diverse degrees by unformed materials that enter into it, and
leave by passing through all possible states. To enter or leave the machine, to
be in the machine, to walk around it, to approach it—these are all still components of the machine itself: these are states of desire, free of all interpretation.
The line of escape is part of the machine. Inside or outside, the animal is part
of the burrow-machine. The problem is not that of being free but of finding a

                         8 D CONTENT AND EXPRESSION

way out, or even a way in, another side, a hallway, an adjacency. Maybe there
are several factors that we must take into account: the purely superficial unity
of the machine, the way in which men are themselves pieces of the machine,
the position of desire (man or animal) in relation to the machine. In the "Penal
Colony," the machine seems to have a strong degree of unity and the man enters
completely into it. Maybe this is what leads to the final explosion and the crumbling of the machine. In Amerika, in contrast, K remains exterior to a whole series of machines, going from one to the other, expulsed as soon as he tries to
enter: the machine-boat, the capitalist machine of the uncle, the machine-hotel
and so on. In The Trial, it is once again a question of a determined machine like
the single machine of justice; but its unity is so nebulous, an influence machine,
a contamination, that there is no longer any difference between being outside or
inside. In The Castle, the apparent unity gives way in turn to a basic segmentation ("[The Castle was only] a rambling pile consisting of innumerable small
buildings closely packed together. . . . I don't fit in with the peasants, nor, I
imagine, with the Castle. 'There is no difference between the peasantry and the
Castle,' said the teacher"); but this time, the indistinction of inside and outside
leads to the discovery of another dimension, a sort of adjacency marked by halts,
sudden stops where parts, gears, and segments assemble themselves: "The street
he was in .did not lead up to the castle hill; it only made toward it and then,
as if deliberately, turned aside, and though it did not lead away from the castle,
it led no nearer to it either." Desire evidently passes through these positions and
states or, rather, through all these lines. Desire is not form, but a procedure,
a process.

Chapter 2
An Exaggerated Oedipus

Kafka's "Letter to the Father," on which so many unfortunate psychoanalytic interpretations are based is a portrait, a photo, inserted into a machine of an entirely different sort. The father with his head bent—not only because he is guilty
himself, but also because he makes the son feel guilty and never stops judging
him. Everything is the father's fault: if I have sexual problems, if I don't get married, if I cannot write, if I lower my head in public, if I have had to construct
an alternate, infinitely more barren world. Yet this letter comes very late. Kafka
knows quite well that nothing in it is true. His inaptitude for marriage, his writing, the attraction to an intense and barren world are completely positive motivations from a libidinal point of view; they aren't reactions in a derivative relation
to the father. Kafka himself declares that a thousand times, and Max Brod will
speak about the weakness of any Oedipal interpretation of Kafka's conflicts,
even the infantile ones.1 Nonetheless, the interest of the letter lies in a particular
sliding effect; Kafka moves from a classic Oedipus of the neurotic sort, where
the beloved father is hated, accused, and declared to be guilty, to a much more
perverse Oedipus who falls for the hypothesis of the father's innocence, of a "distress" shared by father and son alike. But Kafka makes this move in order to engage in an even more extreme accusation, a reproach that is so strong that it becomes unattributable to any particular persons and unlimited (like the "postponement" of The Trial) and passes through a series of paranoid interpretations. Kafka feels it so strongly that he imagines the father speaking and he has
him say: you want to show "first, that you are not guilty; second, that I am the
guilty one; and third, that out of sheer magnamity, you are ready not only to

                                           9

                         10 D AN EXAGGERATED OEDIPUS

forgive me but (what is both more and less) also to prove and be willing to believe yourself that-contrary to the truth—I am also not guilty." This perverse
shift, which finds in the supposed innocence of the father an even worse accusation, evidently has a goal, an effect, a procedure behind it.
    The goal is to obtain a blowup of the "photo," an exaggeration of it to the
point of absurdity. The photo of the father, expanded beyond all bounds, will
be projected onto the geographic, historical, and politicalf the world in
order to reach vast regions of it: "I feel as if I could consider living in only those
regions that either are not covered by you or are not within your reach." An
Oedipalization of the universe. The Name of the Father encodes the names of
history-Jews, Czechs, Germans, Prague, city-county. But beyond that, to the
degree that one enlarges Oedipus, this sort of microscopic enlargement shows
up the father for what he is; it gives him a molecular agitation in which an entirely different sort of combat is being played out.One might say that in projecting the photo of the father onto the map of the world, Kafka unblocks the impasse that is specific to the photo and invents a way out of this impasse, putting
it into connection with a whole underground network, and with all the ways out
from this network. As Kafka himself says, the problem isn't that of liberty but
of escape. The question of the father isn't how to become free in relation to him
(an Oedipal question) but how to find a path there where he didn't find any. The
hypothesis of a common innocence, of a distress shared by father and son, is
thus the worst of all hypotheses. In it, the father appears as the man who had
to renounce his own desire and his own faith, if only to leave the "rural ghetto"
where he was born; he appears as the man who demands only that the son submit
because he himself is in submission to a dominant order in a situation from
which there is no way out ("The whole thing is, of course, no isolated phenomenon. It was much the same with a large section of this transitional generation
of Jews, which had migrated from the still comparatively devout countryside to
the cities"). In short, it's not Oedipus that produces neurosis; it is neurosis -that
is, a desire that is already submissive and searching to communicate its own
submission —that produces Oedipus. Oedipus, the market value of neurosis. In
contrast, to augment and expand Oedipus by adding to it and making a paranoid
and perverse use of it is already to escape from submission, to lift one's head
up, and see passing above the shoulders of the father what had really been the
question all along: an entire micropolitics of desire, of impasses and escapes,
of submissions and rectifications. Opening the impasse, unblocking it. Deterritorializing Oedipus into the world instead of reterritorializing everything in
Oedipus and the family. But to do this, Oedipus had to be enlarged to the point
of absurdity, comedy. To do this, the "Letter to the Father" had to be written.
The mistake of psychoanalysis was to trap itself and us, since it lives off of the
market value of neurosis from which it gains all its surplus value. "Dramas and

                         AN EXAGGERATED OEDIPUS D 11

tragedies are written about [the revolt of the son against the father], yet in reality
it is material for comedy".2
    Two years after the "Letter to the Father," Kafka admitted that he had
"plunged into discontent" and did so "with all the means that [his] time and tradition gave [him]."3 It turns out that Oedipus is one of these means-fairly modern, widespread since Freud's time, allowing many comic effects. All it takes
is to exaggerate it: "Strange how make-believe, if engaged in systematically
enough, can change into reality." But Kafka does not refuse the exterior influence of the father only in order to invoke an interior genesis or an internal
structure that would still be Oedipal. "I cannot grant that the first beginnings of
my unhappiness were inwardly necessitated; they may have indeed had a necessity, but not an inward one—theyswarmeddownn flieand could have
been as easily driven off." In that lies the essential point: beyond the exterior
or the interior, an agitation, a molecular dance, an entire limit-connection with
an Outside that is going to disguise itself as an exaggerated Oedipus that is beyond all limits.
    This can occur because the comic amplification has two aspects to it. On the
one hand, one discovers behind the familial triangle (father-mother-child) other
infinitely more active triangles from which the family itself borrows its own
power, its own drive to propagate submission, to lower the head and make heads
lower. Because it's that that the libido of the child really invests itself in from
the start: by means of the family photo, a whole map of the world. Sometimes,
one of the terms of the familial triangle finds itself replaced by another term that
is enough to defamiliarize the whole thing (thus, the family store stages a scene
of father-employees-child with the child placing himself near the lowest of the
employees whose boots he wishes to lick; or inthe Russian friend
takes the place of one of the terms of the triangle and transforms it into a machine of judgment or condemnation). Sometimes, it's the whole triangle that
changes its form and its characters and reveals itself to be judiciary or economic
or bureaucratic or political, and so on. Take, for example, the judge-lawyeraccused in The Trial where the father no longer exists as such (or the trio of
uncle-lawyer-Block who each want K at all costs to take the trial seriously). Or
the proliferating trios—bank employees, policemen, judges. Or the geopolitical
triangle of Germans-Czechs-Jews which is an implicit aspect of Kafka's father:
"In Prague, people reproached [the Jews] for not being Czechs, and in Saaz and
Eger, for not being Germans."4 For this reason, the hypothesis of the innocence
and the distress of the father forms the worst of accusations, the father having
done nothing but lower his head, submit to a power that is not his own, enter
into an impasse, by betraying his origin as a Czech Jew from the countryside.
    Thus, the too well-formed family triangle is really only a conduit for investments of an entirely different sort that the child endlessly discovers underneath

                        12 D AN EXAGGERATED OEDIPUS

his father, inside his mother, in himself. The judges, commissioners,
bureaucrats, and so on, are not substitutes for the father; rather, it is the father
who is a condensation of all these forces that he submits to and that he tries to
get his son to submit to. The family opens onto doors, on which from the beginning there knock " 'diabolical powers'that rejoice from the fact that they will arrive soon."5 What Kafka immediately anguishes or rejoices in is not the father
or the superego or some sort of signifier but the American technocratic apparatus or the Russian bureaucracy or the machinery of Fascism. And to the degree
that the familial triangle comes undone either in a single term or in its totality
to the profit of those powers that are really its driving force, we could say that
the other triangles that surge up behind it have something malleable, diffuse, a
perpetual transformation from one triangle to another, either because one of the
terms or points begins to proliferate, or because the sides of the triangle don't
stop deforming. Thus, at the beginning of The Trial, three unidentified characters turn into three bank employees, in a shifting relation to the three inspectors
and the three curious people clustered at the window. In the first representation
of the tribunal, we are still in the realm of the well-determined triangle with the
judge and the two sides, right and left. But then we find an internal proliferation
that spreads like a cancerous invasion, an inextricable entangling of offices and
bureaucrats, an infinite and ungraspable hierarchy, a contamination of suspect
spaces (although he uses entirely different means, one could find an equivalent
in Proust where the unity of characters and the figures that they constitute give
way to nebulae, to proliferating, fluid ensembles). Similarly, behind the father,
there is all the ambiguity of the Jews, who have left their rural Czech milieu to
go to the German towns, even if it means being attacked on two sides-a triangle
of transformation. All children can understand this; they all have a political and
geographic map with diffuse and moving contours if only because of their nursemaids, servants, employees of the father, and so on. And if the father maintains
the love and admiration of his son, that's because in his childhood, the father
already confronted some of the diabolical powers even if it meant being beaten
by them.
    Yet, insofar as the comic expansion of Oedipus allows one to see these other
oppressor triangles through the lens of the microscope, there appears at the same
time the possiblity of an escape, a line of escape. To the inhumaness of the "diabolical powers," there is the answer of a becoming-animal: to become a beetle,
to become a dog, to become an ape, "head over heels and away," rather than
lowering one's head and remaining a bureaucrat, inspector, judge, or judged. All
children build or feel these sorts of escapes, these acts of becoming-animal. And
the animal as an act of becoming has nothing to do with a substitute for the father, or with an archetype. Because the father, as a Jew who leaves the country
to settle in the city, is undoubtedly caught in a process of real deterritorialization; but he never stops reterritorializing, in his family, in his business, in the

                         AN EXAGGERATED OEDIPUS D 13

system of his submissions and of his authorities. As for the archetypes, these
are processes of spiritual reterritorialization.6 The acts of becoming-animal are
the exact opposite of this; these are absolute deterritorializations, at least in principle, that penetrate deep into the desert world invested in by Kafka. "Yet the
attraction of my world too is strong; those who love me love me because I am
'forsaken'-not, I feel sure, on the principle of a Weissian vacuum, but because
they sense that in happy moments I enjoy on another plane the freedom of movement completely lacking to me here."7 To become animal is to participate in
movement, to stake out the path of escape in all its positivity, to cross a threshold, to reach a continuum of intensities that are valuable only in themselves, to
find a world of pure intensities where all forms come undone, as do all the significations, signifiers, and signifieds, to the benefit of an unformed matter of deterritorialized flux, of nonsignifying signs. Kafka's animals never refer to a
mythology or to archetypes but correspond solely to new levels, zones of liberated intensities where contents free themselves from their forms as well as from
their expressions, from the signifier that formalized them. There is no longer
anything but movements, vibrations, thresholds in a deserted matter: animals,
mice, dogs, apes, cockroaches are distinguished only by this or that threshold,
this or that vibration, by the particular underground tunnel in the rhizome or the
burrow. Because these tunnels are underground intensities. In the becomingmouse, it is a whistling that pulls the music and the meaning from the words.
In the becoming-ape, it is a coughing that "sound[s] dangerous but mean[s] nothing" (to become a tuberculoid ape). In the becoming-insect, it is a mournful
whining that carries along the voice and blurs the resonance of words. Gregor
becomes a cockroach not to flee his father but rather to find an escape where
his father didn't know to find one, in order to flee the director, the business, and
the bureaucrats, to reach that region where the voice no longer does anything
but hum: " 'Did you hear him? It was an animal's voice,' said the chief clerk."
    It is true that Kafka's animal texts are much more complex that we seem to
be saying. Or, quite the contrary, much simpler. For example, in the "Report
to an Academy," it is no longer a question of a becoming-animal of man, but
a becoming-man of the ape; this becoming is presented as a simple imitation and
if it is a question of finding an escape (an escape, and not "liberty"), this escape
doesn't consist in fleeing—quite the contrary. Flight is challenged when it is useless movement in space, a movement of false liberty; but in contrast, flight is
affirmed when it is a stationary flight, a flight of intensity ("No, freedom was
not what I wanted. Only a way out; right, or left, or in any direction; I made
no other demand"). On the other hand, the imitation is only superficial, since
it no longer concerns the reproduction of figures but the production of a continuum of intensities in a nonparallel and asymmetrical evolution where the man
no less becomes an ape than the ape becomes a man. The act of becoming is
a capturing, a possession, a plus-value, but never a reproduction or an imitation.

                        14 D AN EXAGGERATED OEDIPUS

"[T]here was no attraction for me in imitating human beings; I imitated them because I needed a way out, and for no other reason." In fact, the animal captured
by the man finds itself deterritorialized by human force, as the whole of the beginning of "A Report" tells us. But, in turn, the deterritorialized animal force
precipitates and intensifies the deterritorialization of the deterritorializing human
force (if we can express it that way). "My ape nature fled out of me, head over
heels and away, so that my first teacher was almost himself turned into an ape
by it, had soon to give up teaching and was taken away to a mental hospital."8
Thus, there is constituted a conjunction of the flux of deterritorialization that
overflows imitation which is always territorial. It is in this way also that the orchid seems to reproduce an image of the bee but in a deeper way deterritorializes
into it, at the same time that the bee in turn deterritorializes by joining with the
orchid: the capture of a fragment of the code, and not the reproduction of an
image. (In "The Investigations of a Dog," every idea of resemblance is even
more energetically eliminated. Kafka attacks "the suspect temptations of resemblence that imagination proposes"; through the dog's solitude, it is the greatest
difference, the schizo difference that he tries to grasp.)
    Thus, we have two effects of the development or comic enlargement of Oedipus: the discovery a contrario of other triangles that operate beneath and, indeed, in the familial triangle, and theoutlining of paths of escape
of the orphaned becoming-animal. No text seems to better show the connection
of these two aspects than "The Metamorphosis." The bureaucratic triangle forms
itself progressively. First, the director who comes to menace and to demand;
then the father who has resumed his work at the bank and who sleeps in his uniform, demonstrating the external power that he is still in submission to as if even
at home he was "only at the beck and call of his superior" and finally, in a single
moment, the intrusion of the three bureaucrat lodgers who penetrate the family
itself, taking up its roles, sitting "where formerly Gregor and his father and
mother had taken their meals." And as a correlate of all of this, the whole
becoming-animal of Gregor, his becoming beetle, junebug, dungbeetle, cockroach, which traces an intense line of flight in relation to the familial triangle
but especially in relation to the bureaucratic and commercial triangle.
    But at the very moment when we seemed to grasp the connections of a Going
Beyond and a Falling Short of Oedipus, why are we farther than ever from a
wayout; why do we remain at an impasse? It is because there is always the danger of the return of Oedipal force. The amplifying perverse usage of Oedipus
is not sufficient to guard against every new closure, every new reconstitution
of the familial triangle that takes over other triangles such as the animal lines.
In this sense, "The Metamorphosis" is the exemplary story of a reOedipalization. We would say that the process of Gregor's deterritorialization
through his becoming-animal finds itself blocked for a moment. Is it the fault
of Gregor who doesn't dare go all the way? To please him, his sister wanted to

                         AN EXAGGERATED OEDIPUS D 15

empty out the whole room. But Gregor refused to let go of the portrait of the
lady in fur. He sticks to the portrait, as if to a last territorialized image. In fact,
that's what the sister cannot tolerate. She accepted Gregor; like him, she wanted
the schizo incest, an incest of strong connections, incest with the sister in opposition to Oedipal incest, incest that gives evidence of a nonhuman sexuality as in
the becoming-animal. But, jealous of the portrait, she begins to hate Gregor and
condemns him. From that point on, Gregor's deterritorialization through the
becoming-animal fails; he re-Oedipalizes himself through the apple that is
thrown at him and has nothing to do but die, the apple buried in his back. Likewise, the deterritorialization of the family through more complex and diabolical
triangles has no room to develop; the father chases away the three bureaucrat
lodgers, a return to the paternalistic principle of the Oedipal triangle, the family
happily closes in on itself. And yet, it is not certain that Gregor was at fault.
Isn't it rather that the acts of becoming-animal cannot follow their principle all
the way through-that they maintain a certain ambiguity that leads to their insufficiency and condemns them to defeat? Aren't the animals still too formed,
too significative, too territorialized? Doesn't the whole of the becoming-animal
oscillate between a schizo escape and an Oedipal impasse? The dog, Oedipal animal par excellence, is often referred to by Kafka in his Diaries and his letters
as a schizo beast, like the musical dogs of "The Investigations," or as the diabolical dog of "Temptation in the Village." In fact, Kafka's principal animal tales
were written just beforer at the same time as it, like a sort of counterpoint to the novel which liberates itself from all animal concern to the benefit
of a much higher concern.

Chapter 3
What Is a Minor Literature?

So far we have dealt with little more than contents and their forms: bent
head-straightened head, triangles-lines of escape. And it is true that in the realm
of expression, the bent head connects to the photo, and the erect head to sound.
But as long as the form and the deformation or expression are not considered
for themselves, there can be no real way out, even at the level of contents. Only
expression gives us the method. The problem of expression is staked out by
Kafka not in an abstract and universal fashion but in relation to those literatures
that are considered minor, for example, the Jewish literature of Warsaw and
Prague. A minor literature doesn't come from a minor language; it is rather that
which a minority constructs within a major language. But the first characteristic
of minor literature in any case is that in it language is affected with a high coefficient of deterritorialization. In this sense, Kafka marks the impasse that bars access to writing for the Jews of Prague and turns their literature into something
impossible—the impossibility of not writing, the impossibility of writing in German, the impossibility of writing otherwise.1 The impossibility of not writing
because national consciousness, uncertain or oppressed, necessarily exists by
means of literature ("The literary struggle has its real justification at the highest
possible levels"). The impossibility of writing other than in German is for the
Prague Jews the feeling of an irreducible distance from their primitive Czech
territoriality. And the impossibility of writing in German is the deterritoralization of the German population itself, an oppressive minority that speaks a language cut off from the masses, like a "paper language" or an artificial language;
this is all the more true for the Jews who are simultaneously a part of this

                                          16

                       WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE? D 17

minority and excluded from it, like "gypsies who have stolen a German child
from its crib." In short, Prague German is a deterritoriali/ed language, appropriate for strange and minor uses. (This can be compared in another context to what
blacks in America today are able to do with the English language.)
    The second characteristic of minor literatures is that everything in them is political. In major literatures, in contrast, the individual concern (familial, marital,
and so on) joins with other no less individual concerns, the social milieu serving
as a mere environment or a background; this is so much the case that none of
these Oedipal intrigues are specifically indispensable or absolutely necessary but
all become as one in a large space. Minor literature is completely different; its
cramped space forces each individual intrigue to connect immediately to politics.
The individual concern thus becomes all the more necessary, indispensable,
magnified, because a whole other story is vibrating within it. In this way, the
family triangle connects to other triangles—commercial, economic, bureaucratic, juridical-that determine its values. When Kafka indicates that one of the
goals of a minor literature is the "purification of the conflict that opposes father
and son and the possibility of discussing that conflict," it isn't a question of an
Oedipal phantasm but of a political program. "Even though something is often
thought through calmly, one still does not reach the boundary where it connects
up with similar things, one reaches the boundary soonest in politics, indeed, one
even strives to see it before it is there, and often sees this limiting boundary
everywhere. . . . What in great literature goes on down below, constituting a
not indispensable cellar of the structure, here takes place in the full light of day,
what is there a matter of passing interest for a few, here absorbs everyone no
less than as a matter of life and death."2
    The third characteristic of minor literature is that in it everything takes on
a collective value. Indeed, precisely because talent isn't abundant in a minor
literature, there are no possibilities for an individuated enunciation that would
belong to this or that "master" and that could be separated from a collective enunciation. Indeed, scarcity of talent is in fact beneficial and allows the conception
of something other than a literature of masters; what each author says individually already constitutes a common action, and what he or she says or does is
necessarily political, even if others aren't in agreement. The political domain has
contaminated every statementBut above all else, because collective
or national consciousness is "often inactive in external life and always in the process of break-down," literature finds itself positively charged with the role and
function of collective, and even revolutionary, enunciation. It is literature that
produces an active solidarity in spite of skepticism; and if the writer is in the
margins or completely outside his or her fragile community, this situation allows
the writer all the more the possibility to express another possible community and
to forge the means for another consciousness and another sensibility; just as the
dog of "Investigations" calls out in his solitude to another science. The literary

                       18 D WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE?

machine thus becomes the relay for a revolutionary machine-to-come, not at all
for ideological reasons but because the literary machine alone is determined to
fill the conditions of a collective enunciation that is lacking elsewhere in this
milieu: literature is the people's concern.3 It is certainly in these terms that
Kafka sees the problem. The message doesn't refer back to an enunciating subject who would be its cause, no more than to a subject of the statement (sujet
d'enonce) who would be its effect. Undoubtedly, for a while, Kafka thought according to these traditional categories of the two subjects, the author and the
hero, the narrator and the character, the dreamer and the one dreamed of.4 But
he will quickly reject the role of the narrator, just as he will refuse an author's
or master's literature, despite his admiration for Goethe. Josephine the mouse
renounces the individual act of singing in order to melt into the collective enunciation of "the immense crowd of the heros of [her] people." A movement from
the individuated animal to the pack or to a collective multiplicity —seven canine
musicians. In "The Investigations of a Dog," the expressions of the solitary
researcher tend toward the assemblagof a collective enunciation
of the canine species even if this collectivity is no longer or not yet given. There
isn't a subject; there are only collective assemblages of enunciation, and literature expresses these acts insofar as they're not imposed from without and insofar
as they exist only as diabolical powers to come or revolutionary forces to be constructed. Kafka's solitude opens him up to everything going on in history today.
The letter K no longer designates a narrator or a character but an assemblage
that becomes all the more machine-like, an agent that becomes all the more collective because an individual is locked into it in his or her solitude (it is only
in connection to a subject that something individual would be separable from the
collective and would lead its own life).
    The three characteristics of minor literature are the deterritorialization of language, the connection of the individual to a political immediacy, and the collective assemblage of enunciation. We might as well say that minor no longer
designates specific literatures but the revolutionary conditions for every literature within the heart of what is called great (or established) literature. Even he
 who has the misfortune of being born in the country of a great literature must
 write in its language, just as a Czech Jew writes in German, or an Ouzbekian
 writes in Russian. Writing like a dog digging a hole, a rat digging its burrow.
 And to do that, finding his own point of underdevelopment, his own patois, his
own third world, his own desert. There has been much discussion of the questions "What is a marginal literature?" and "What is a popular literature, a
proletarian literature?" The criteria are obviously difficult to establish if one
doesn't start with a more objective concept—that of minor literature. Only the
possibility of setting up a minor practice of major language from within allows
 one to define popular literature, marginal literature, and so on.5 Only in this way
can literature really become a collective machine of expression and really be

                      WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE? D 19

able to treat and develop its contents. Kafka emphatically declares that a minor
literature is much more able to work over its material.6 Why this machine of
expression, and what is it? We know that it is in a relation of multiple deterritorializations with language; it is the situation of the Jews who have dropped the
Czech language at the same time as the rural environment, but it is also the situation of the German language as a "paper language." Well, one can go even farther; one can push this movement of deterritorialization of expression even farther. But there are only two ways to do this. One way is to artificially enrich
this German, to swell it up through all the resources of symbolism, of oneirism,
of esoteric sense, of a hidden signifier. This is the approach of the Prague
school, Gustav Meyrink and many others, including Max Brod.7 But this attempt
implies a desperate attempt at symbolic reterritorialization, based in archetypes,
Kabbala, and alchemy, that accentuates its break from the people and will find
its political result only in Zionism and such things as the "dream of Zion." Kafka
will quickly choose the other way, or, rather, he will invent another way. He
will opt for the German language of Prague as it is and in its very poverty. Go
always farther in the direction of deterritorialization, to the point of sobriety.
Since the language is arid, make it vibrate with a new intensity. Oppose a purely
intensive usage of language to all symbolic or even significant or simply signifying usages of it. Arrive at a perfect and unformed expression, a materially intense expression. (For these two possible paths, couldn't we find the same alternatives, under other conditions, in Joyce and Beckett? As Irishmen, both of them
live within the genial conditions of a minor literature. That is the glory of this
sort of minor literature—to be the revolutionary force for all literature. The utilization of English and of every language in Joyce. The utilization of English and
French in Beckett. But the former never stops operating by exhilaration and
overdetermination and brings about all sorts of worldwide reterritorializations.
The other proceeds by dryness and sobriety, a willed poverty, pushing deterritorialization to such an extreme that nothing remains but intensities.)
    How many people today live in a language that is not their own? Or no
longer, or not yet, even know their own and know poorly the major language
that they are forced to serve? This is the problem of immigrants, and especially
of their children, the problem of minorities, the problem of a minor literature,
but also a problem for all of us: how to tear a minor literature away from its
own language, allowing it to challenge the language and making it follow a sober
revolutionary path? How to become a nomad and an immigrant and a gypsy in
relation to one's own language? Kafka answers: steal the baby from its crib, walk
the tightrope.
    Rich or poor, each language always implies a deterritorialization of the
mouth, the tongue, and the teeth. The mouth, tongue, and teeth find their primitive territoriality in food. In giving themselves over to the articulation of sounds,
the mouth, tongue, and teeth deterritorialize. Thus, there is a certain disjunction

                      20 D WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE?

between eating and speaking, and even more, despite all appearances, between
eating and writing. Undoubtedly, one can write while eating more easily than
one can speak while eating, but writing goes further in transforming words into
things capable of competing with food. Disjunction between content and expression. To speak, and above all to write, is to fast. Kafka manifests a permanent
obsession with food, and with that form of food par excellence, in other words,
the animal or meat—an obsession with the mouth and with teeth and with large,
unhealthy, or gold-capped teeth.8 This is one of Kafka's main problems with
Felice. Fasting is also a constant theme in Kafka's writings. His writings are a
long history of fasts. The Hunger Artist, surveyed by butchers, ends his career
next to beasts who eat their meat raw, placing the visitors before an irritating
alternative. The dogs try to take over the mouth of the investigating hound by
filling it with food so that he'll stop asking questions, and there too there is an
irritating alternative: "[T]hey would have done better to drive me away and refuse to listen to my questions. No, they did not want to do that; they did not
indeed want to listen to my questions, but it was because I asked these questions
that they did not want to drive me away." The investigating hound oscillates between two sciences, that of food—a science of the Earth and of the bent head
("Whence does the Earth procure this food?")-and that of music which is a
science of the air and of the straightened head, as the seven musical dogs of the
beginning and the singing dog of the end well demonstrate. But between the two
there is something in common, since food can come from high up and the
science of food can only develop through fasting, just as the music is strangely
silent.
    Ordinarily, in fact, language compensates for its deterritorialization by a
reterritorialization in sense. Ceasing to be the organ of one of the senses, it becomes an instrument of Sense. And it is sense, as a correct sense, that presides
over the designation of sounds (the thing or the state of things that the word
designates) and, as figurative sense, over the affectation of images and
metaphors (those other things that words designate under certain situations or
conditions). Thus, there is not only a spiritual reterritorialization of sense, but
also a physical one. Similarly, language exists only through the distinction and
the complementarity of a subject of enunciation, who is in connection with
sense, and a subject of the statement, who is in connection, directly or metaphorically, with the designated thing. This sort of ordinary use of language can be
called extensive or representative—the reterritorializing function of language
(thus, the singing dog at the end of the "Investigations" forces the hero to abandon his fast, a sort of re-Oedipalization).
     Now something happens: the situation of the German language in Czechoslovakia, as a fluid language intermixed with Czech and Yiddish, will allow
Kafka the possibility of invention. Since things are as they are ("it is as it is, it
is as it is," a formula dear to Kafka, marker of a state of facts), he will abandon

                       WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE? D 21

sense, render it no more than implict; he will retain only the skeleton of sense,
or a paper cutout.
    Since articulated sound was a deterritorialized noise but one that will be reterritorialized in sense, it is now sound itself that will be deterritorialized irrevocably, absolutely. The sound or the word that traverses this new deterritorialization no longer belongs to a language of sense, even though it derives from it,
nor is it an organized music or song, even though it might appear to be. We
noted Gregor's warbling and the ways it blurred words, the whistling of the
mouse, the cough of the ape, the pianist who doesn't play, the singer who doesn't
sing and gives birth to her song out of her nonsinging, the musical dogs who
are musicians in the very depths of their bodies since they don't emit any music.
Everywhere, organized music is traversed by a line of abolition—just as a language of sense is traversed by a line of escape-in order to liberate a living and
expressive material that speaks for itself and has no need of being put into a
form.9 This language torn from sense, conquering sense, bringing about an active neutralization of sense, no longer finds its value in anything but an accenting
of the word, an inflection: "I live only here or there in a small word in whose
vowel. . . . I lose my useless head for a moment. The first and last letters are
the beginning and end of my fishlike emotion."10 Children are well skilled in the
exercise of repeating a word, the sense of which is only vaguely felt, in order
to make it vibrate around itself (at the beginning of The Castle, the schoolchildren are speaking so fast that one cannot understand what they are saying).
Kafka tells how, as a child, he repeated one of his father's expressions in order
to make it take flight on a line of non-sense: "end of the month, end of the
month"11 The proper name, which has no sense in itself, is particularly propitious for this sort of exercise. Milena, with an accent on the i, begins by evoking
"a Greek or a Roman gone astray in Bohemia, violated by Czech, cheated of its
accent," and then, by a more delicate approximation, it evokes "a woman whom
one carries in one's arms out of the world, out of the fire," the accent marking
here an always possible fall or, on the contrary, "the lucky leap which you yourself make with your burden."12
    It seems to us that there is a certain difference, even if relative and highly
nuanced, between the two evocations of the name Milena: one still attaches itself
to an extensive, figurative scene of the fantasmatic sort; the second is already
much more intensive, marking a fall or a leap as a threshold of intensity contained within the name itself. In fact, we have here what happens when sense
is actively neutralized. As Wagenbach says, "The word is master; it directly
gives birth to the image." But how can we define this procedure? Of sense there
remains only enough to direct the lines of escape. There is no longer a designation of something by means of a proper name, nor an assignation of metaphors
by means of a figurative sense. Butmages, the thing no longer forms anything but a sequence of intensive states, a ladder or a circuit for intensities that

                      22 D WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE?

one can make race around in one sense or another, from high to low, or from
low to high. The image is this very race itself; it has become becoming—the
becoming-dog of the man and the becoming-man of the dog, the becoming-ape
or the becoming-beetle of the man and vice versa. We are no longer in the situation of an ordinary, rich language where the word dog, for example, would
directly designate an animal and would apply metaphorically to other things (so
that one could say "like a dog").13 Diaries, 1921: "Metaphors are one of the
things that makes me despair of literature." Kafka deliberately kills all metaphor,
all symbolism, all signification, no less than all designation. Metamorphosis is
the contrary of metaphor. There is no longer any proper sense or figurative
sense, but only a distribution of states that is part of the range of the word. The
thing and other things are no longer anything but intensities overrun by deterritorialized sound or words that are following their line of escape. It is no longer
a question of a resemblance between the comportment of an animal and that of
a man; it is even less a question of a simple wordplay. There is no longer man
or animal, since each deterritorializes the other, in a conjunction of flux, in a
continuum of reversible intensities. Instead, it is now a question of a becoming
that includes the maximum of difference as a difference of intensity, the crossing
of a barrier, a rising or a falling, a bending or an erecting, an accent on the word.
The animal does not speak "like" a man but pulls from the language tonalities lacking in signification; the words themselves are not "like" the animals but in
their own way climb about, bark and roam around, being properly linguistic
dogs, insects, or mice.14 To make the sequences vibrate, to open the word onto
unexpected internal intensities —in short, an asignifying intensive utilization of
language. Furthermore, there is no longer a subject of the enunciation, nor a
subject of the statement. It is no longer the subject of the statement who is a dog,
with the subject of the enunciation remaining "like" a man; it is no longer the
subject of enunciation who is "like" a beetle, the subject of the statement remaining a man. Rather, there is a circuit of states that forms a mutual becoming, in
the heart of a necessarily multiple or collective assemblage.
    How does the situation of the German language in Prague—a withered
vocabulary, an incorrect syntax—contribute to such a utilization? Generally, we
might call the linguistic elements, however varied they may be, that express the
"internal tensions of a language"It is in this sense that the
linguist Vidal Sephiha terms intensive "any linguistic tool that allows a move toward the limit of a notion or a surpassing of it," marking a movement of language toward its extremes, toward a reversible beyond or before.15 Sephiha well
shows the variety of such elements which can be all sorts of master-words,
verbs, or prepositions that assume all sorts of senses; prenominal or purely intensive verbs as in Hebrew; conjunctions, exclamations, adverbs; andtermsthat
connote pain.16 One could equally cite the accents that are interior to words,
their discordant function. And it would seem that the language of a minor litera-

                       WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE? D 23

ture particularly develops these tensors or these intensives. In the lovely pages
where he analyzes the Prague German that was influenced by Czech, Wagenbach cites as the characteristics of this form of German the incorrect use of
prepositions; the abuse of the pronominal; the employment of malleable verbs
(such as Giben, which is used for the series "put, sit, place, take away" and
which thereby becomes intensive); the multiplication and succession of adverbs;
the use of pain-filled connotations; the importance of the accent as a tension internal to the word; and the distribution of consonants and vowels as part of an
internal discordance. Wagenbach insists on this point: all these marks of the poverty of a language show up in Kafka but have been taken over by a creative utilization for the purposes of a new sobriety, a new expressivity, a new flexibility,
a new intensity.17 "Almost every word I write jars up against the next, I hear
the consonants rub leadenly against each other and the vowels sing an accompaniment like Negroes in a minstrel show."18 Language stops being representative in order to now move toward its extremities or its limits. The connotation
of pain accompanies this metamorphosis, as in the words that become a painful
warbling with Gregor, or in Franz's cry "single and irrevocable." Think about
the utilization of French as a spoken language in the films of Godard. There too
is an accumulation of stereotypical adverbs and conjunctions that form the base
of all the phrases—a strange poverty that makes French a minor language within
French; a creative process that directly links the word to the image; a technique
that surges up at the end of sequences in connection with the intensity of the limit
"that's enough, enough, he's had enough," and a generalized intensification,
coinciding with a panning shot where the camera pivots and sweeps around without leaving the spot, making the image vibrate.
    Perhaps the comparative study of images would be less interesting than the
study of the functions of language that can work in the same group across different languages—bilingualism or even multilingualism. Because the study of the
functions in distinct languages alone can account for social factors, relations of
force, diverse centers of power, it escapes from the "informational" myth in order to evaluate the hierarchic and imperative system of language as a transmission of orders, an exercise of power or of resistance to this exercise. Using the
research of Ferguson and Gumperz, Henri Gobard has proposed a tetralinguistic
model: vernacular, maternal, or territorial language, used in rural communities
or rural in its origins; a vehicular, urban, governmental, even worldwide language, a language of businesses, commercial exchange, bureaucratic transmission, and so on, a language of the first sort of deterritorialization; referential language, language of sense and of culture, entailing a cultural reterritorialization;
mythic language, on the horizon of cultures, caught up a spiritual or religious
reterritorialization. The spatiotemporal categories of these languages differ
sharply: vernacular language is here; vehicular language is everywhere; referential language is over there; mythic language is beyond. But above all else, the

                      24 D WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE?

distribution of these languages varies from one group to the next and, in a single
group, from one epoch to the next (for a long time in Europe, Latin was a vehicular language before becoming referential, then mythic; English has become the
worldwide vehicular language for today's world).19 What can be said in one language cannot be said in another, and the totality of what can and can't be said
varies necessarily with each language and with the connections between these
languages.20 Moreover, all these factors can have ambiguous edges, changing
borders, that differ for this or that material. One language can fill a certain function for one material and another function for another material. Each function
of a language divides up in turn and carries with it multiple centers of power.
A blur of languages, and not at all a system of languages. We can understand
the indignation of integrationists who cry when Mass is said in French, since
Latin is being robbed of its mythic function. But the classicists are even more
behind the times and cry because Latin has even been robbed of its referential
cultural function. They express regret in this way for the religious or educational
forms of powers that this language exercised and that have now been replaced
by other forms. There are even more serious examples that cross over between
groups. The revival of regionalisms, with a reterritorialization through dialect
or patois, a vernacular language—how does that serve a worldwide or transnational technocracy? How can that contribute to revolutionary movements, since
they are also filled with archaisms that they are trying to impart a contemporary
sense to? From Servan-Schreiber to the Breton bard to the Canadian singer. And
that's not really how the borders divide up, since the Canadian singer can also
bring about the most reactionary, the most Oedipal of reterritorializations, oh
mama, oh my native land, my cabin, ole, ole. We would call this a blur, a
mixed-up history, a political situation, but linguists don't know about this, don't
want to know about this, since, as linguists, they are "apolitical," pure scientists.
Even Chomsky compensated for his scientific apoliticism only by his courageous
struggle against the war in Vietnam.
    Let's return to the situation in the Hapsburg empire. The breakdown and fall
of the empire increases the crisis, accentuates everywhere movements of deterritorialization, and invites all sorts of complex reterritorializations-archaic,
mythic, or symbolist. At random, we can cite the following among Kafka's contemporaries: Einstein and his deterritorialization of the representation of the universe (Einstein teaches in Prague, and the physicist Philipp Frank gives conferences there with Kafka in attendance); the Austrian dodecaphonists and their
deterritorialization of musical representation (the cry that is Marie's death in
Wozzeck, or Lulu's, or the echoed si that seems to us to follow a musical path
similar in certain ways to what Kafka is doing); the expressionist cinema and
its double movement of deterritorialization and reterritorialization of the image
(Robert Wiene, who has Czech background; Fritz Lang, born in Vienna; Paul
Wegener and his utilization of Prague themes). Of course, we should mention

                       WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE? D 25

Viennese psychoanalysis and Prague school linguistics.21 What is the specific
situation of the Prague Jews in relation to the "four languages?" The vernacular
language for these Jews who have come from a rural milieu is Czech, but the
Czech language tends to be forgotten and repressed; as for Yiddish, it is often
disdained or viewed with suspicion—it frightens, as Kafka tells us. German is
the vehicular language of the towns, a bureaucratic language of the state, a commercial language of exchange (but English has already started to become indispensable for this purpose). The German language—but this time, Goethe's
German—has a cultural and referential function (as does French to a lesser degree). As a mythic language, Hebrew is connected with the start of Zionism and
still possesses the quality of an active dream. For each of these languages, we
need to evaluate the degrees of territoriality, deterritorialization, and reterritorialization. Kafka's own situation: he is one of the few Jewish writers in Prague
to understand and speak Czech (and this language will have a great importance
in his relationship with Milena). German plays precisely the double role of vehicular and cultural language, with Goethe always on the horizon (Kafka also
knows French, Italian, and probably a bit of English). He will not learn Hebrew
until later. What is complicated is Kafka's relation to Yiddish; he sees it less as
a sort of linguistic territoriality for the Jews than as a nomadic movement of deterritorialization that reworks German language. What fascinates him in Yiddish
is less a language of a religious community than that of a popular theater (he
will become patron and impresario for the travelling theater of Isak Lowy).22
The manner in which Kafka, in a public meeting, presented Yiddish to a rather
hostile Jewish bourgeois audience is completely remarkable: Yiddish is a language that frightens more than it invites disdain, "dread mingled with a certain
fundamental distaste"; it is a language that is lacking a grammar and that is filled
with vocables that are fleeting, mobilized, emigrating, and turned into nomads
that interiorize "relations of force." It is a language that is grafted onto MiddleHigh German and that so reworks the German language from within that one
cannot translate it into German without destroying it; one can understand Yiddish only by "feeling it" in the heart. In short, it is a language where minor utilizations will carry you away: "Then you will come to feel the true unity of Yiddish and so strongly that it will frighten you, yet it will no longer be fear of
Yiddish but of yourselves. Enjoy this self-confidence as much as you can!"23
    Kafka does not opt for a reterritorialization through the Czech language. Nor
toward a hypercultural usage of German with all sorts of oneiric or symbolic
or mythic flights (even Hebrew-ifying ones), as was the case with the Prague
school. Nor toward an oral, popular Yiddish. Instead, using the path that Yiddish opens up to him, he takes it in such a way as to convert it into a unique
and solitary form of writing. Since Prague German is deterritorialized to several
degrees, he will always take it farther, to a greater degree of intensity, but in
the direction of a new sobriety, a new and unexpected modification, a pitiless

                      26 D WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE?

rectification, a straightening of the head. Schizo politeness, a drunkenness
caused by water.24 He will make the German language take flight on a line of
escape. He will feed himself on abstinence; he will tear out of Prague German
all the qualities of underdevelopment that it has tried to hide; he will make it
cry with an extremely sober and rigorous cry. He will pull from it the barking
of the dog, the cough of the ape, and the bustling of the beetle. He will turn syntax into a cry that will embrace the rigid syntax of this dried-up German. He
will push it toward a deterritorialization that will no longer be saved by culture
or by myth, that will be an absolute deterritorialization, even if it is slow, sticky,
coagulated. To bring language slowly and progressively to the desert. To use
syntax in order to cry, to give a syntax to the cry.
    There is nothing that is major or revolutionary exept the minor. To hate all
languages of masters. Kafka's fascination for servants and employees (the same
thing in Proust in relation to servants, to their language). What interests him
even more is the possibility of making of his own language-assuming that it is
unique, that it is a major language or has been—a minor utilization. To be a sort
of stranger within his own language; this is the situation of Kafka's Great Swimmer.25 Even when it is unique, a language remains a mixture, a schizophrenic
melange, a Harlequin costume in which very different functions of language and
distinct centers of power are played out, blurring what can be said and what can't
be said; one function will be played off against the other, all the degrees of territoriality and relative deterritorialization will be played out. Even when major,
a language is open to an intensive utilization that makes it take flight along creative lines of escape which, no matter how slowly, no matter how cautiously, can
now form an absolute deterritorialization. All this inventiveness, not only lexically, since the lexical matters little, but sober syntactical invention, simply to
write like a dog (but a dog can't write—exactly, exactly). It's what Artaud did
with French-cries, gasps; what Celine did with French, following another line,
one that was exclamatory to the highest degree. Celine's syntactic evolution went
from Voyage to Death on the Credit Plan, then from Death on the Credit Plan
to Guignol's Band. (After that, Celine had nothing more to talk about except his
own misfortunes; in other words, he had no longer any desire to write, only the
need to make money. And it always ends like that, language's lines of escape:
silence, the interrupted, the interminable, or even worse. But until that point,
what a crazy creation, what a writing machine! Celine was so applauded for Voyage that he went even further in Death on the Credit Plan and then in the prodigious Guignol's Band where language is nothing more than intensities. He spoke
with a kind of "minor music." Kafka, too, is a minor music, a different one, but
always made up of deterritorialized sounds, a language that moves head over
heels and away.) These are the true minor authors. An escape for language, for
music, for writing. What we call pop—pop music, pop philosophy, pop
writing—Worterflucht. To make use of the polylingualism of one's own Ian-

                     WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE? D 27

guage, to make a minor or intensive use of it, to oppose the oppressed quality
of this language to its oppressive quality, to find points of nonculture or underdevelopment, linguistic Third World zones by which a language can escape, an
animal enters into things, an assemblage comes into play. How many styles or
genres or literary movements, even very small ones, have only one single
dream: to assume a major function in language, to offer themselves as a sort of
state language, an official language (for example, psychoanalysis today, which
would like to be a master of the signifier, of metaphor, of wordplay). Create
the opposite dream: know how to create a becoming-minor. (Is there a hope for
philosophy, which for a long time has been an official, referential genre? Let
us profit from this moment in which antiphilosophy is trying to be a language
of power.)

Chapter 4
The Components of Expression

We started with some simple formal oppositions: bent head-straightened head
for the form of content, photo-sound for the form of expression. These were
states or figures of desire. But it seems that sound doesn't act like a formal element; rather, it leads to an active disorganization of expression and, by reaction,
of content itself. Thus, through its way of "taking flight," sound brings into play
a new figure of the straightened head that now moves "head over heels and
away." And far from the animal being only on the side of the bent head (or of
the alimentary mouth), this same sound, this same tonality, induces a becominganimal and links it with the restraightened head. Thus, we find ourselves not in
front of a structural correspondence between two sorts of forms, forms of content and forms of expression, but rather in front of an expression machine capable of disorganizing its own forms, and of disorganizing its forms of contents,
in order to liberate pure contents that mix with expressions in a single intense
matter. A major, or established, literature follows a vector that goes from content to expression. Since content is presented in a given form of the content, one
must find, discover, or see the form of expression that goes with it. That which
conceptualizes well expresses itself. But a minor, or revolutionary, literature begins by expressing itself and doesn't conceptualize until afterward ("I do not see
the word at all, I invent it")1 Expression must break forms, encourage ruptures
and new sproutings. When a form is broken, one must reconstruct the content
that will necessarily be part of a rupture in the order of things. To take over,
to anticipate, the material. "Art is a mirror, which goes 'fast,' like a watch —
sometimes."2

                                        28

                     THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION D 29

    What are the components of this literary machine, of Kafka's writing, or expression, machine?
    One component is the letters. In what ways do they belong to the oeuvre? In
fact, Kafka's work is not defined by a publishing intention. Kafka evidently did
not think of publishing his letters; quite the contrary, he thought of destroying
everything he wrote as though it were all like letters. If the letters really are a
part of the work, it is because they are an indispensable gear, a motor part for
the literary machine as Kafka conceives of it even if this machine is destined to
disappear or explode to a degree comparable to the machine of the Penal
Colony. Impossible to conceive of Kafka's machine without it involving an
epistolary aspect. Perhaps it is as a function of the letters, of their demands, of
their potentials and their insufficiencies, that the other pieces will be assembled.
The fascination of Kafka for the letters of his predecessors (Flaubert, Kleist,
Hebbel). But what Kafka sees and experiments on to his own ends is a perverse,
diabolical utilization of the letter. "Diabolical in all its innocence," says Kafka.
The letters pose directly, innocently, the diabolical power of the literary machine. To fabricate letters, this not a question of sincerity but one of functioning.
Letters to this or that woman, letters to friends, letter to the father; nonetheless,
there is always a woman behind these letters who is the real addressee (destinataire)—the woman that the father is supposed to have made him lose, the
one that his friends hope he will break from, and so on. To substitute for love
the letter of love?. To deterritorialize love. To substitute for the feared conjugal
contract a pact with the devil. The letters are inseparable from such a pact; they
are this pact itself. How to "attach girls to oneself by writing"?3 Kafka has just
made the acquaintance of the daughter of the concierge at the Goethe house in
Weimar; they take photographs together, they write postcards to each other.
Kafka is astonished that the girl writes to him "as he desires" and yet doesn't take
him seriously, treats him "as a mere figurehead." Everything is already here in
this letter, even though it hasn't reached its point of perfection. The reference
to Goethe-if Kafka so admired Goethe, was this as a "master" or as the author
of the pact with the devil that Faust makes and that determines the fate of Marguerite? The elements of the literary machine are already in these letters, even
if they are insufficiently utilized and remain ineffective: the cliched photo on the
postcard, the writing on the reverse side, the sound that takes flight and whose
intensity one reads in a lowered voice, in a single tone. In his first meeting with
Felice, Kafka will show her these photos, these postcards of Weimar, as though
they would serve to extablish a new circuit where matters would become more
serious.
    The letters are a rhizome, a network, a spider's web. There is a vampirism
in the letters, a vampirism that is specifically epistolary. Dracula the vegetarian,
the hunger artist, who drinks the blood of carnivorous humans, has his castle
nearby. There is something of Dracula in Kafka, a Dracula who works by let-

                     30 D THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION

ters, letters that are like bats. They prowl by night and, by day, are locked in
his coffin-desk: "The night is not nocturnal enough." When he imagines a kiss,
it is that of Gregor who grabs onto the naked neck of his sister, or that of K with
Fraulein Burstner, a kiss like that of "some thirsty animal lapping greedily at a
spring of long-sought fresh water." To Felice, Kafka describes himself without
shame or joke as extraordinarily thin, needing blood (my heart "is so weak that
it doesn't even manage to send blood all the way to the end of my legs"). KafkaDracula has his line of escape in his room, in his bed, and his faraway force
comes from that which the letters will bring him. He fears only two things: the
family's cross and marriage's garlic. The letters must bring him blood, and the
blood will give him the force to create. He is not looking for a feminine inspiration or for a maternal protection but for a physical force that will enable him
to write. He says that literary creation is "payment for the devil's services."
Kafka does not live the thinness of his anorexic body as shameful; he is only
pretending. He understands his body as the means while in bed to cross
thresholds and acts of becoming, each organ "being under special observation."
All that is necessary is that one give him a little blood. A flux of letters for a
flux of blood. From the first meeting with Felice, Kafka the vegetarian is attracted by her muscular arms, rich with blood, astounded by her great carnivorous teeth; Felice has a feeling of danger and assures him that she is a light
eater. But from his contemplation of her, Kafka makes the decision to write, to
write a great deal to Felice.4 The letters to Milena-that will be another story.
That is a more mannered kind of love, with marriage on the horizon. Kafka has
learned a great deal, experimented a lot. There is in Milena an Angel of Death
as Kafka himself suggests. She is more an accomplice than a recipient of a letter.
Kafka explains to her the damnation of the letters, their necessary connection
to a ghost who drinks up all the kisses given to him along his journey. "Dislocation of souls." And Kafka distinguishes two series of technical inventions: those
that tend to restore natural communication by triumphing over distances and
bringing people together (the train, the car, the airplane), and those that represent the vampirish revenge of the phantom where there is reintroduced "the
ghostly element between people" (the post, the telegraph, the telephone, wireless
telegraphy).5
    But how do the letters function? Without a doubt, because of their genre, they
maintain the duality of the two subjects: for the moment, let us distinguish a subject of enunciation as the form of expression that writes the letter, and a subject
of the statement that is the form of content that the letter is speaking about (even
if / speak about me). It is this duality that Kafka wants to put to a perverse or
diabolical use. Instead of the subject of enunciation using the letter to recount
his own situation, it is the subject of the statement that will take on a whole
movement that has become fictive or no more than superficial. It is the sending
of the letter, the trajectory of the letter, the gestures of the postman that will take

                     THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION D 31

the place of the subject of enunciation's recounting (hence, the importance of the
postman or the messenger who is doubled, like the two messengers in The Castle, by the clothes that stick to him like sheets of paper). An example of a truly
Kafkaesque love: a man falls for a woman that he saw only a single time; tons
of letters; he can never visit; he keeps the letters close to him in a trunk; and
the day after the breakup, with the last letter arriving in the country, he knocks
the mailman down. The correspondence with Felice is filled with this impossibility of visiting. The flux of letters replaces seeing, arriving. Kafka never stops
writing to Felice even though he's seen her only once. With all his force, he
wants to impose the conditions of a pact. She must write two times a day. That's
the pact with the devil. The Faustian pact with the devil finds its source in a faraway force as against the proximity of a conjugal contract. To utter things from
the start and then to see only those things later on or in a dream. Kafka sees in
a dream: "The whole staircase was littered from top to bottom with the loosely
heaped pages I had read. That was a real wish-dream."6 A mad desire to write
and to tear the letters away from their addressee. Given their generic nature, the
desire of the letters thus consists of the following: it transfers movement onto
the subject of the statement; it gives the subject of the statement an apparent
movement, an unreal movement, that spares the subject of enunciation all need
for a real movement. As in "Wedding Preparations," this subject can remain on
his pallet, like an insect, since he has sent his fully-dressed double in the letter,
with the letter. This exchange, or this reversal of the duality of the two subjects,
the subject of the statement taking on that real movement that is normally the
province of the subject of the enunciation, produces a doubling. And it is this
doubling that is already diabolical; the devil is this very doubling. Here, we find
one of the origins of the double in Kafka: "The Man Who Disappeared," the first
draft of Amerika, which portrays two brothers "one of whom [goes] to America
while the other remain[s] in a European prison."7 And "The Verdict," which
revolves entirely around the theme of letters, portrays the subject of enunciation
who remains in the paternal store and the Russian friend who is not only an addressee but a potential subject of the statement and who does not exist perhaps
outside the letters.
    Letters as a minor genre, letters as desire, the desire of letters, have a second
generic characteristic. That which is the greatest horror for the subject of enunciation will be presented as an external obstacle that the subject of the statement,
relegated to the letter, will try at all costs to conquer, even if it means perishing.
That is called "The Description of a Struggle." The horror of Kafka toward all
forms of conjugality. A prodigious operation by which he translates this horror
into a topography of obstacles (where to go? how to arrive? Prague, Vienna,
Berlin?). The Surveyor. And also the other operation by which he enumerates
a numbered list of conditions that the subject of the statement thinks can dissipate
horror when, in fact, it is this very horror in the subject of enunciation that in-

                     32 D THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION

spires them (a Life Plan or a Life Program, a la Kleist). It is really torturous,
it is the embodiment of the humors. A double and dark reversal of the stages
of romantic love and of marriage. This method comports several advantages. It
allows one to posit the innocence of the subject of enunciation, since he can
do nothing and has done nothing; the innocence also of the subject of the statement, since he has done everything possible; and even the innocence of the third
party, of the addressee (even you, Felice, you are innocent). And finally this
method makes things worse than they would be if only one of these instances,
or the entire world, was guilty. This is the method that triumphs in the "Letter
to the Father." Everyone is innocent, that is the worst of possibilities. The "Letter to the Father" is the exorcism of Oedipus and the family by the writing machine, just as the letters to Felice are the exorcism of conjugality. To make a
map of Thebes instead of performing Sophocles, to make a topography of obstacles instead of fighting against destiny (to substitute a destined addressee for destiny). It is useless to ask whether the letters are a part of the oeuvre or whether
they are the source of some of the themes of the work; they are an integrative
part of the writing machine or the expression machine. It is as such that we must
think of the letters in general as belonging to the writing, outside the work or
not, and understand moreover why certain literary forms such as the novel have
naturally made use of the epistolary form.
    But there is a third generic characteristic: this function of the letters doesn't
immediately prevent a superficial return of guilt. An Oedipal, familial, or conjugal return of guilt. Am I capable of loving my father? Am I able to get married?
Am I a monster? "Devilish in [one's] innocence," one can be innocent and yet
diabolical. This is the theme of "The Judgment" and the constant sentiment that
Kafka feels in his relationships with the women he loves.8 He knows that he is
Dracula and he knows that he is a vampire, a spider and its web. Only it is more
than ever necessary to distinguish various points—the duality of the two subjects, their exchange or their doubling, seem to found a feeling of guilt. But,
there again, the guilty one is ultimately the subject of the statement. The guilt
itself is only the surface movement, an ostentatious movement, that hides an intimate laugh (how many awful things have been written on Kafka and guilt, Kafka
and the law, and so on). Judaism, a paper envelope: Dracula cannot feel guilty,
Kafka cannot feel guilty, Faust is not guilty, and this is not a bit of hypocrisy.
The heart of the matter lies elsewhere. One cannot understand anything about
a diabolical pact, a pact with the devil, if one believes that it can inspire guilt
in the person who signs it, that is, the one who initiates it or writes the letter.
Guilt is the statement of a judgment that comes from outside and that works,
preys, only on a weak soul. Weakness, oh my weakness, my fault, guilt is a surface movement in Kafka as a subject of the statement. In contrast, there is his
force as a subject of enunciation in the desert. But that doesn't solve anything,
one is not saved for that. Because if guilt is only a surface movement, it is bran-

                     THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION D 33

dished precisely as the index of an entirely different danger—the other affair.
The real panic is that the writing machine will turn against the mechanic. Look
at the Penal Colony. The danger of the diabolical pact, of diabolical innocence,
is not guilt but the trap, the impasse within the rhizome, the closing of all escape,
the burrow that is blocked everywhere. Fear. The devil himself is caught in the
trap. One allows oneself to be re-Oedipalized not by guilt but by fatigue, by a
lack of invention, by the imprudence of what one has started, by the photo, by
the police—diabolical powers from faraway. Thus innocence no longer matters.
The formula of diabolical innocence saves you from guilt but does not save you
from the photocopy of the pact and the condemnation that results from it. The
danger is not feeling guilt as a neurosis, as a state, but judging guilt as a Trial.
And that's the fatal outcome of the letter; the "letter to the father" is a trial that
closes in on Kafka; the letters to Felice turn into a mock Trial, with an entire
tribunal, family, friends, defense, accusation. Kafka has a presentiment of this
from the start, since he is writing "The Judgment" at the same time he begins
the letters to Felice. But "The Judgment" comes from the great fear that a letter
machine will entrap the author. The father begins by denying that the addressee,
the Russian friend, exists; then he recognizes his existence, but only to reveal
that the friend has been writing to him (the father) in order to denounce the son's
betrayal (the flux of the letters changes direction; it turns back on its sender; and
so on). "Your ugly little letters . . . " The "ugly letter" of Sortini, the bureaucrat, in The Castle. To wish away this new danger, Kafka never stops confusing
matters; he sends yet another letter that modifies or denies what he's just sent
so that Felice will always be one letter behind in her replies. But nothing stops
the return of destiny: in his rupture with Felice, Kafka will emerge broken, but
not guilty. He for whom these letters were an indispensable component, a positive (not negative) instigation to write everything, finds himself without a desire
to write, his whole body broken by the trap that almost caught him. The formula,
"devilish in innocence," hasn't been enough.
    [These three intensive elements show why Kafka was fascinated by letters.
You have to have a special sensibility for that. At this point, we would like to
compare his letters to those of another diabolical figure, Proust. Proust also uses
his letters to make a faraway pact with the devil or a phantom in order to break
the proximity of the conjugal contract. He too opposes writing and marriage.
Two scrawny and anorexic vampires who take nourishment from blood only by
sending out their letter-bats. The overall principle is the same in both cases: each
letter is a letter of love, whether real or superficial. Love letters can be attractive, repulsive, or filled with reproach, compromise, or proposition, without any
of that changing anything about their nature; they are part of a pact with the devil
that wishes away the contract with God, with the family, or with the loved one.
But, more precisely, the first quality of the letters —an exchange or doubling of
the two subjects—appears fully in Proust: the subject of the statement assumes

                     34 D THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION

all the movement while the subject of the enunciation remains in bed, in a corner
of his web like a spider (Proust's becoming-spider). Moreover, topographies of
obstacles and lists of conditions as functions of the letter are given priority in
Proust to such a degree that the addressee can't tell if the author wants him to
come visit, has never wanted that, is pushing the addressee away only to really
tempt the addressee, and so on. The letter loses its identity as a memory, dream,
or photo to become a rigorous map of the paths to take or to avoid, a rigidly
conditioned life program (like The Castle, Proust's work is the complicated path
of a road that never stops approaching while moving away).9 Finally, as in
Kafka, guilt in Proust is only a superficial envelope that accompanies the argument or the apparent motion of the subject of the statement; but beneath this
playful guilt, there is deeper panic in the recumbent writer—fear that he's said
too much, fear that the letter machine will turn against him and throw him back
into what he was trying to get rid of, anguish that the many little messages or
the dirty little letters will entrap him. The incredible blackmail letter to Albertine
that he sends when he doesn't know that she is dead and that comes back to him
in the form of a special delivery message from Gilberte, whom he confuses with
Albertine, announcing her marriage. He too will emerge broken from all this.
But with an equivalent vampirism, with an equivalent jealousy. The differences
between Proust and Kafka are great and involve more than the difference between the worldly, diplomatic style of the former and the investigative, judicial
style of the latter. Both of them seek to avoid, through letters, the specific sort
of proximity that characterizes the conjugal relationship and turns the situation
into a seeing and being seen (fo example, Kafka's terror when Felice tells him
that she would like to be near him while he works). It doesn't matter whether
the conjugality is official or unofficial, heterosexual or homosexual. But to get
rid of proximity, Kafka maintains and guards spatial distance, the faraway position of the loved one: he too presents himself as a prisoner (prisoner of his body,
of his room, of his family, of his oeuvre) and multiplies the obstacles that prevent him from seeing or rejoining his beloved.10 In Proust, in contrast, the same
exorcism takes place in an inverse way: one reaches the imperceptible, the invisible, by exaggerating proximity, by making it a carceral proximity. Proust's
solution is the strangest—to overcome the conjugal conditions of presence and
of vision. By an excessive rapprochement. One sees less the closer one is. Thus,
it is Proust who is\hsjailerwhile the loved one is in a contiguous prison. The
ideal of Proust's letters consists of small notes slid under the door.]
    Another component of Kafka's writing machine is the stories. They are essentially animalistic even though there aren't animals in all the stories. According
to Kafka, the animal is the object par excellence of the story: to try to find a
way out, to trace a line of escape. The letters aren't enough, since the devil, the
pact with the devil, not only offers no line of escape but risks making us fall
into a trap. Kafka writes stories like "The Judgment" or "The Metamorphosis"

                     THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION D 35

at the same time that he begins the correspondence with Felice, either to give
an image of the danger or to exorcise it-better to have finished and mortal stories than the infinite flux of letters. The letters are perhaps the motor force that,
by the blood they collect, start the whole machine working. Nonetheless, for
Kafka, it is a question of writing something other than letters—a question, then,
of creating. This something other is presaged by the letters (the animal nature
of the victim, that is, of Felice, vampirish utilization of the letters themselves)
but can only be realized in an autonomous writing even if it remains perpetually
unachieved. What Kafka does in his room is to become animal and this is the
essential object of the stories. The first sort of creation is the metamorphosis.
A wife's eyes shouldn't see that above all else, nor should the eyes of a father
or mother. We would say that for Kafka, the animal essence is the way out, the
line of escape, even if it takes place in place, or in a cage. A line of escape, and
not freedom. A vital escape and not an attack. In "The Jackals and the Arabs,"
the jackals say, "We're not proposing to kill them. . . . Why, the mere sight
of their living flesh makes us turn tail and flee into cleaner air, into the desert,
which for that very reason is our home." If Bachelard is unfair to Kafka when
he compares him to Lautreamont, this is because he assumes above all else that
the dynamic essence of the animal lies in freedom and aggression: Madoror's
becomings-animal are attacks that are all the more cruel in being free and gratuitous. It is not like this in Kafka; it is the exact opposite, and we could even say
that his concept is the more correct one from the point of view of Nature itself.
Bachelard's postulate leads him to oppose Lautreamont's speed and Kafka's slowness.! ' Let us remind ourselves, however, of several elements of the animalistic
stories: (1) there is no possibility of distinguishing those cases where the animal
is treated as an animal and those where it is part of a metamorphosis; everthing
in the animal is a metamorphosis, and the metamorphosis is part of a single circuit of the becoming-human of the animal and the becoming-animal of the human; (2) the metamorphosis is a sort of conjunction of two deterritorializations,
that which the human imposes on the animal by forcing it to flee or to serve the
human, but also that which the animal proposes to the human by indicating
ways-out or means of escape that the human would never have thought of by
himself (schizo-escape); each of these two deterritorializations is immanent to
the other and makes it cross a threshold; (3) thus, what matters is not at all the
relative slowness of the becoming-animal; because no matter how slow it is, and
even the more slow it is, it constitutes no less an absolute deterritorialization
of the man in opposition to the merely relative deterritorializations that the man
causes to himself by shifting, by traveling; the becoming-animal is an immobile
voyage that stays in one place; it only lives and is comprehensible as an intensity
(to transgress the thresholds of intensity).12
    There is nothing metaphoric about the becoming-animal. No symbolism, no
allegory. Nor is it the result of a flaw or a malediction, the effect of some sort

                     36 D THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION

of guilt. As Melville says of the becoming-whale of Captain Ahab, it is a "panorama," not a "Gospel." It is a map of intensities. It is an ensemble of states, each
distinct from the other, grafted onto the man insofar as he is searching for a way
out. It is a creative line of escape that says nothing other than what it is. In contrast to the letters, the becoming-animal lets nothing remain of the duality of a
subject of enunciation and a subject of the statement; rather, it constitutes a single process, a unique method that replaces subjectivity. However, if the
becoming-animal is the object par excellence of the stories, we must in turn examine the insufficiencies of the the stories. We might say that they are caught
 up in a choice that from both sides condemns them to defeat from the point of view
 of Kafka's project, no matter their literary splendor. On the one hand, the story
will be perfect and finished but then will close in on itself. Or it will open but
will open to something that could only be developed in a novel that would be
itself interminable. In the first case, the story confronts a danger that is different
from that of the letters, although somewhat analogous. The letters had to fear
a sort of reflux directed against the subject of enunciation; the stories, on the
other hand, bump up against a no-way out of the animal way out, an impasse
of the line of escape (it is for this reason that they end when they erect this impasse). To be sure, the becoming-animal has nothing to do with a merely superficial sort of meaning, like that in the letters: however slow it may be, the deterritorialization of the becoming-animal is absolute; the line of escape is well
programmed, the way out is well established. But this is only one side of the
poles. In the same way that the egg, in its potentiality, contains two poles, the
becoming-animal is a potentiality that is gifted with two equally real poles—a
properly animal pole and a properly familial one. We saw how the animal oscillated between its own becoming-inhuman and an all-too-human familiarization:
thus, the dog in "The Investigations" is deterritorialized by the musical dogs at
the story's beginning, but he is reterritorialized, re-Oedipalized, by the singerdog of the ending. He ends up oscillating between two "sciences" and is reduced
to invoking the eventual coming of a third science that would manage to escape
the situation (but, obviously, this third science will no longer be the object of
a mere story and will demand a whole novel). To take another example: we saw
how Gregor's metamorphosis was the story of a re-Oedipalization that leads him
into death, that turns his becoming-animal into a becoming-dead. Not only the
dog, but all the animals, oscillate between a schizo Eros and an Oedipal
Thanatos. It is in this perspective alone that metaphor, with its whole anthropocentric entourage, threatens to come back on the scene. In short, the
animalist stories are a component of the machine of expression, but distinct from
the letters, since they no longer operate within a superficial movement or within
the distinction of two subjects. Grasping the real, writing themselves within the
real itself, they are caught up in the tension between two opposing poles or realities. The becoming-animal effectively shows a way out, traces a line of escape,

                     THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION d 37

but is incapable of following it or making it its own (for this reason, "The Judgment" remains an Oedipal story, one that Kafka presents as such, where the son
dies without becoming an animal and without being able to develop an open contact with Russia).
    Thus, we have to consider the other hypothesis: not only do the animal stories
show a way out that the becomings-animal are themselves incapable of following, but already, that which enabled them to show the way out was something
different that acted inside them. And this something different can be really expressed only in the novels, in the attempts at novels, as the third component of
the machine of expression. Because in the exact moment Kafka begins the novels
(or tries to expand a story into a novel) he abandons the becomings-animal in
order to substitute for them a more complex assemblage. The stories and their
becomings-animal had already been inspired by this underground assemblage,
but they weren't able to make this assemblage function directly—they weren't
even able to make it see the light of day. It was as though the animal was still
too close, still too perceptible, too visible, too individuated, and so the
becoming-animal started to become a becoming-molecular: Josephine the mouse
surrounded by her people, "the numberless throng of the heroes of our people,"
the perplexed dog in front of the agitation in all directions of the seven musical
dogs; the confused animal of "The Burrow" faced with the thousands of sounds
that came from all sides from undoubtedly smaller animals; the hero of
"Memoirs of the Kalda Railroad," who came to hunt bear and wolves, but who
found only rat packs that he killed with a knife while watching them wave their
little hands (and in "The Bucket Rider," "In the thick, hard-frozen snow, I walk
along the tracks of small arctic dogs, my movement has lost all direction").
Kafka is fascinated by everything that is small. If he doesn't seem to like children
that is because they are caught in an irreversible becoming-big; the animal kingdom, in contrast, involves smallness and imperceptibility. But, even more, in
Kafka, the molecular multiplicity tends itself to become integrated with, or make
room for, a machine, or rather a machinic assemblage, the parts of which are
independent of each other, but which functions nonetheless. The grouping of the
musical dogs is actually described as this sort of very minute assemblage. Even
when the animal is unique, its burrow isn't; the burrow is a multiplicity and an
assemblage. The Blumfeld story presents a bachelor who begins by asking himself if he should get a little dog; but the relaying of the dog is determined by
a strange molecular or machinic system, "two small white celluloid balls with
blue stripes jumping up and down side by side on the parquet." Blumfeld is finally persecuted by two subordinate assistants who act as parts of a bureaucratic
machine. Maybe there is in Kafka a very particular intermediary situation, since
he himself exists between still being an animal and already being an assemblage.
In any case, the animals, as they are or become in the stories, are caught in this
alternative: either they are beaten down, caught in an impasse, and the story

                     38 D THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION

ends; or, on the contrary, they open up and multiply, digging new ways out all
over the place but giving way to molecular multiplicities and to machinic assemblages that are no longer animal and can only be given proper treatment in the
novels.
    The novels are the third component of Kafka's writing machine. They present
very few animals, except in secondary roles, and no becoming-animal. It is as
though the negative pole of the animal had been neutralized and the positive
pole, for its part, had emigrated elsewhere, to the realm of the machine and assemblages. It is as though the becoming-animal was not rich enough in articulations and junctions. Let us imagine that Kafka wrote a novel about the
bureaucratic world of ants or about the Castle of the termites: in that case, he
would have been a sort of Capek (a compatriot and contemporary of Kafka). He
would have written a science fiction novel. Or a dark novel, a realist novel, an
idealist novel, a roman-a-clef—genres that one could find in the Prague school.
He would have described, more or less directly, more or less symbolically, the
modern world, the sadness or the rigidity of this world, the crimes of mechanicity and of bureaucracy. None of these things were part of Kafka's writing project. Had he written about the justice of the ants or the castle of the termites, the
whole realm of metaphors, realist or symbolist, would have returned. He would
never have been able to so sharply grasp the violence of an Eros that is
bureaucratic, judiciary, economic, or political.
    Someone might say that the break we are instituting between the stories and
the novels doesn't exist, since many of the stories are drafts, disjointed building
blocks for eventually abandoned novels, and that the novels in turn are interminable and unfinished stories. But that's not the question. The question is: what
makes Kafka plan for a novel and, renouncing it, abandon it or try to close it
up in the form of story, or, on the other hand, say to himself that maybe a story
can be the starting-point for a novel even if it will also be abandoned? We could
propose the following sort of rule (of course, it doesn't always apply; it works
only in some cases): (1) when a text deals essentially with a becoming-animal,
it cannot be developed into a novel; (2) a text that deals with a becoming-animal
cannot be thought to be developable into a novel except if it also includes sufficient machinic indexes that go beyond the animal and that, in this way, are the
seeds for a novel; (3) a text that can be the seed of a novel will be abandoned
if Kafka imagines an animal escape that allows him to finish with it; (4) a novel
doesn't become a novel, even if it is unfinished, even and especially if it is interminable, unless the machinic indexes organize themselves into a real assemblage
that is self-sufficient; (5) on the other hand, a text that includes an explicit machine will not develop unless it succeeds in plugging into a concrete sociopolitical assemblage (since a pure machine is only a blueprint that forms neither
a story nor a novel). Kafka thus has many reasons to abandon a text, either because it stops short or because it is interminable. But Kafka's criteria are of an

                     THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION D 39

entirely new sort and apply only to him; from one genre of text to another, there
are interactions, reinvestments, exchanges, and so on. Each failure is a masterpiece, a branch of the rhizome.
   The first case would apply to "The Metamorphosis". This is why many critics
say that it is the most perfected (?) of Kafka's works. Given over to his
becoming-animal, Gregor finds himself re-Oedipalized by his family and goes
to his death. The family even stifles the potentialities of a bureaucratic machine
(as with the three tenants who are chased away). The story ends then in a state
of mortuary perfection. The second case could apply to "The Investigations of
a Hound." Kafka sees it as his own sort ofBouvard et Pecuchet.13 But the seeds
of development that are effectively present here are inseparable from the
machinic indexes that give rhythm to the object of the "Investigations"—the musical indexes of the assemblage of the seven dogs, the scientific indexes of the
three forms of knowledge. But since these indexes are still caught in and by the
becoming-animal, they abort. Kafka will not succeed here in writing his Bouvard et Pecuchet; this is because the dogs put him on the path of something that
he can grasp only through another sort of material. The third case is illustrated
by "The Penal Colony." There too the seed of a novel exists, connected this time
to an explicit machine. But this machine, which is too mechanical, still too connected to overly Oedipal coordinates (the commandant-officer=father-son),
doesn't develop at all. And Kafka can imagine an animal conclusion to this text
that falls back to the level of a story: in one version of the "Colony," the voyager
finally becomes a dog and starts running in all directions on all fours, leaping
around and hurrying back to his post (in another version a snake-woman intervenes).14 This is the inverse of "The Investigations of a Hound"; instead of the
machinic indexes suceeding in escaping from the becoming-animal, the machine
reverts to a new rebecoming-animal. The fourth case, which is the only really
positive one, concerns the three big novels, the three big interminable works:
here, the machine is no longer mechanical and reified; instead, it is incarnated
in very complicated social assemblages that, through the employment of human
personnel, through the use of human parts and cogs, realize effects of inhuman
violence and desire that are infinitely stronger than those one can obtain with
animals or with isolated mechanisms. This is why it is important to observe how
at a single moment (for example, the moment of The Trial), Kafka continues to
describe becomings-animal that are not developed into novels and conceives of
a novel that never stops developing its assemblages. The fifth and last case
would be a sort of counter proof of this: there is a "defeat" in the novel not only
when the becoming-animal continues to predominate but also when the machine
doesn't succeed in incarnating itself in the living political and social assemblages
that make up the animated material of the novel. In this case, the novel remains
a rough draft that also cannot develop, no matter what its force and beauty may
be. This is already true of "The Penal Colony" with its still too transcendental,

                     40 D THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION

too isolated and reified, and too abstract machine. It is also true of the admirable, three page text "The Cares of a Family Man," which describes a strange and
useless machine: "a flatstar-shaped spool, around which is wound broken-off
bits of thread [and] that is traversed by a small wooden crossbar . . . and another small rod is joined to that at a right angle." It is also true in the case of
Blumfeld where the two ping-pong balls form a pure machine, the two perverse
and idiotic subordinate assistants form a bureaucratic assemblage, even though
these themes remain disjointed and the writing jumps from one to the other without each one diffusing and penetrating the other.
   Here, then, are the three elements of the machine of writing or of expression
insofar as they are defined by internal criteria, and not by a publishing project.
The letters and the diabolical pact; the stories and the becoming-animal; the
novels and the machinic assemblages. Between these three elements, there is
constant transversal communication, in one direction and another. The Felice
who appears in the letters is an animal not only insofar as, by her sanguinary
nature, she is a choice-prey for the vampire, but even more because there is in
her a full becoming-dog that fascinates Kafka. And, as a modern machinic assemblage, The Trial itself refers back to reactualized archaic sources —a trial of
the becoming-animal that comes to include the condemnation of Gregor, a trial
of the vampire because of his diabolical pact, a condemnation that Kafka really
lived when he first broke up with Felice, like the trial in the hotel where he compared everything to being in front of a tribunal. Nonetheless, we should not believe that there is only one line that extends from the lived experience of the letters to the written experience of the stories and the novels. There is also a
reverse path, and there is an equal amount of lived and written experience in
both situations. Thus, it is the trial as a social, political, and juridical assemblage
that causes Kafka to grasp his becomings-animal, one by one, as the material
in a trial, and to treat his epistolary relationship with Felice as one to be judged
within the terms of a trial. Moreover, the path doesn't go only from the diabolical pact of the letters to the becoming-animal of the stories. It also takes on an
opposite meaning; the becomings-animal have value only in terms of the assemblages that inspire them—assemblages where the animals function like pieces of
a musical machine or of a science machine, a bureaucratic machine, and so on,
and so on. And the letters are already part of a machinic assemblage where
fluxes are exchanged and where the postman plays the erotic role of an indispensable cog of the machine, a bureaucratic mediator without whom the
epistolary pact would be unable to operate (when the dream postman brings
Felice's letters, "He delivered them to me, one in each hand, his arms moving
in perfect precision, like the jerking of piston rods in a steam engine."15) There
is a perpetual communication between the three components of expression. And
although the communication is interrupted in each case in its own way, it is also
passed from component to component. Letters that are stopped because a return,

                     THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION D 41

a processing, blocks them; stories that stop because they cannot develop into
novels, torn in two directions that block any way out—another processing;
novels that Kafka himself stops, since they are interminable and essentially unlimited, infinite—a third trial. Never has so complete an oeuvre been made from
movements that are always aborted, yet always in communication with each
other. Everywhere there is a single and unique passion for writing but not the
same one. Each time the writing crosses a threshold; and there is no higher or
lower threshold. These are thresholds of intensities that are not higher or lower
than the sound that runs through them.
    That's why it is so awful, so grotesque, to oppose life and writing in Kafka,
to suppose that he took refuge in writing out of some sort of lack, weakness,
impotence, in front of life. A rhizome, a burrow, yes—but not an ivory tower.
A line of escape, yes—but not a refuge. The creative line of escape vacuums up
in its movement all politics, all economy, all bureaucracy, all judiciary: it sucks
them like a vampire in order to make them render still unknown sounds that
come from the near future-Fascism, Stalinism, Americanism, diabolical
powers that are knocking at the door. Because expression precedes content and
draws it along (on the condition, of course, is nonsignifying): living and writing,
art and life, are opposed only from the point of view of a major literature. Even
when he is dying, Kafka is overrun by a flux of invincible life that comes equally
from his letters, his stories, his novels —from their individual incompletion (for
whatever reason) and their ability to communicate with each other,, to be exchangeable. Conditions of a minor literature. Only one thing really bothers
Kafka and angers him, makes him indignant: when people treat him as a writer
of intimacy, finding a refuge in literature, as an author of solitude, of guilt, of
an intimate misfortune. However, that's really Kafka's fault, since he held out
that interpretation in order to anticipate the trap through his humor. There is a
Kafka laughter, a very joyous laughter, that people usually understand poorly.
It is for stupid reasons that people have tried to see a refuge far from life in
Kafka's literature, and also an agony, the mark of an impotence and a culpability, the sign of a sad interior tragedy. Only two principles are necessary to accord with Kafka. He is an author who laughs with a profound joy, ajoie de vivre,
in spite of, or because of, his clownish declarations that he offers like a trap or
a circus. And from one end to the other, he is a political author, prophet of the
future world, because he has two poles that he will know how to unify in a completely new assemblage: far from being a writer withdrawn into his room, Kafka
finds that his room offers him a double flux, that of a bureaucrat with a great
future ahead of him, plugged into real assemblages that are in the process of
coming into shape, and that of a nomad who is involved in fleeing things in the
most contemporary way and who plugs into socialism, anarchism, social movements.16 Writing for Kafka, the primacy of writing, signifies only one thing: not
a form of literature alone, the enunciation forms a unity with desire, beyond

                     42 D THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION

laws, states, regimes. Yet the enunciation is always historical, political, and social. A micropolitics, a politics of desire that questions all situations. Never has
there been a more comic and joyous author from the point of view of desire;
never has there been a more political and social author from the point of view
of enunciation. Everything leads to laughter, starting with The Trial. Everything
is political, starting with the letters to Felice.

Chapter 5
Immanence and Desire

Negative theology (or the theology of absence), the transcendence of the law,
the a prioriness of guilt are the dominant themes of so much Kafka interpretation. The famous passages in TheTrial(as well as in "The Penal Colony" and
"The Great Wall of China") present the law as a pure and empty form without
content, the object of which remains unknowable: thus, the law can be expressed
only through a sentence, and the sentence can be learned only through a punishment. No one knows the law's interior. No one knows what the law is in the
Colony; and the needles of the machine write the sentence on the body of the
condemned, who doesn't know the law, at the same time as they inflict their torture upon him. "He will learn [the sentence] on his body." In "The Great Wall
of China": "[I]t is an extremely painful thing to be ruled by laws that one does
not know. . . . [T]he essence of a secret code is that it should remain a mystery." Kant constructed a rational theory of the law's reversal from a Greek conception to the Judeo-Christian one. The law no longer depends on a preexistent
Good that would give it a materiality; it is a pure form on which the good such
as it is depends. The good is that which the law expresses when it expresses itself. One might say that Kafka situates himself as part of this reversal. But the
humor that he puts into it shows an entirely different intention. For him, it is
less a question of presenting this image of a transcendental and unknowable law
than ohemechanismof an entirely different sort of machine, which
needs this image of the law only to align its gears and make them function together with "a perfect synchronicity" (as soon as this image-photo disappears,
the pieces of the machine disperse as in "The Penal Colony"). The Trial must

                                       43

                         44 D IMMANENCE AND DESIRE

be considered a scientific investigation, a report of the experiments on the functioning of a machine in which the law runs the strong risk of playing no more
than the role of exterior armature. That's why the texts in The Trial should be
used only with great care. The primary problem has involved misjudging the
relative importance of these texts and making unwarranted assumptions about
their placement in the novel, as is expecially evident in the ways that Max Brod
arranged things to support his thesis of negative theology.
   Two chapters are of particular concern: the brief final chapter, about K's execution, and the preceding chapter, "In the Cathedral," in which the priest
represents the discourse of the law. Nothing tells us that the final chapter was
written at the end of The Trial; it might have been written when Kafka had just
begun to revise and was still under the influence of his breakup with Felice. It
is a premature, delayed, aborted ending. One can't fix the place where Kafka
would have put it. It might well be a dream that could fit anywhere in the course
of the novel. Indeed, Kafka published, by itself and under the title "A Dream,"
another fragment originally envisioned for The Trial. Max Brod is thus better
inspired when he notes the degree to which The Trial is an interminable novel,
necessarily indefinite: "But as the trial, according to the author's own statement
made by word of mouth, was never to get as far as the highest Court, in a certain
sense the novel could never be terminated—that is to say, it could be prolonged
into infinity" (postface toTrans. Willa and Edwin Muir. [New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1956], 334). The idea of ending with K's execution is contradicted by the whole direction of the novel and by the quality of "unlimited
postponement" that regulates The Trial. The imposition of K's execution as the
final chapter seems to have an equivalent in the history of literature—the placement of the famous description of the plague at the end of Lucretius's book. In
both cases, it is a question of showing that at the last moment, an epicurian can
do no more than submit to agony, or that a Prague Jew can only assume the guilt
that is operating within him. As for the other chapter, "In the Cathedral," the
place of honor given to it, as though it indicated some sort of key to the novel,
as though it constituted proof of the book's religious character, is also well contradicted by its own content. The story about the gatekeeper of the law remains
highly ambiguous, and K learns that the priest who tells this story is a member
of the judiciary apparatus, chaplain for the prisons, one element in a whole series of other elements, and that he has no privilege, since the series has no need
to stop with him. We agree with Uyttersprot's proposal to remove this chapter
and put it before that entitled "The Lawyer, the Industrialist, and the Painter."1
   From the point of view of a supposed transcendence of the law, there must
be a certain necessary connection of the law with guilt, with the unknowable,
with the sentence or the utterance. Guilt must in fact be the a priori that corresponds to transcendence, for each person or for everyone, guilty or innocent.
Having no object and being only pure form, the law cannot be a domain of

                          IMMANENCE AND DESIRE D 45

knowledge but is exclusively the domain of an absolute practical necessity: the
priest in the cathedral explains that "it is not necessary to accept everything as
true, one must only accept it as necessary." Finally, because it has no object of
knowledge, the law is operative only in being stated and is stated only in the act
of punishment: a statement directly inscribed on the real, on the body and the
flesh; a practical statement opposed to any sort of speculative proposition. All
these themes are well presented in The Trial. But it is precisely these themes that
will be the object of a dismantling (demontage), and even of a demolition,
throughout Kafka's long experimentation. The first aspect of this dismantling
consists in "eliminating any idea of guilt from the start," this being part of the
accusation itself: culpability is never anything but the superficial movement
whereby judges and even lawyers confine you in order to prevent you from engaging in a real movement—that is, from taking care of your own affairs.2 Second, K will realize that even if the law remains unrecognizable, this is not because it is hidden by its transcendence, but simply because it is always denuded
of any interiority: it is always in the office next door, or behind the door, on
to infinity (we can already see this quite well in the first chapter of The Trial
where everything happens in the "room next door"). Finally, it is not the law
that is stated because of the demands of a hidden transcendence; it is almost the
exact opposite: it is the statement, the enunciation, that constructs the law in the
name of an immanent power of the one who enounces it—the law is confused
with that which the guardian utters, and the writings precede the law, rather than
being the necessary and derived expression of it.
    The three worst themes in many interpretations of Kafka are the transcendence of the law, the interiority of guilt, the subjectivity of enunciation. They
are connected to all the stupidities that have been written about allegory, metaphor, and symbolism in Kafka. And also, the idea of the tragic, of the internal
drama, of the intimate tribunal, and so on. No doubt, Kafka holds out the bait.
He holds it out even, and especially, to Oedipus; not from complacency but because he wants to make a very special use of Oedipus to serve his diabolical project. It is absolutely useless to look for a theme in a writer if one hasn't asked
exactly what its importance is in the work-that is, how it functions (and not
what its "sense" is). Law, guilt, interiority—Kafka has a great need for them as
the superficial movement of his work. Superficial movement doesn't mean a
mask underneath which something else would be hidden. The superficial movement indicates points of undoing, of dismantling, that must guide the experimentation to show the molecular movements and the machinic assemblages of which
the superficial movement is a global result. We could say that law, guilt, interiority are everywhere. But all that is necessary is to consider a specific piece of
the writing machine-for example, the three pricipal gears —letters, stories,
novels —in order to see that these themes are really nowhere present and don't
function at all. Each of these gears certainly has a primary affective tonality.

                          46 D IMMANENCE AND DESIRE

But, in the letters, it is fear, not guilt: fear of the trap that is closing in on it,
fear of a return of flux, the vampire's fear of being surprised in full daylight by
the sun, by religion, by garlic, and by the stake through the heart (Kafka is
greatly afraid, in his letters, of people and what can happen because of them;
this is quite different from guilt or humiliation). And in the stories about a
becoming-animal, it is escape that has an affective tonality apart from any connection to guilt and also distinct from fear; the becoming-animal lives a life of
escape more than one of fear (the animal in "The Burrow" isn't really afraid, and
the jackals aren't afraid—they liverather in a sort of "lunatic hope"; the musical
dogs "that could dare achieve such thing had no need to fear such things"). In
the novels, finally, it is strange to see the degree to which K doesn't feel any
guilt and doesn't feel fear and doesn't flee; he is completely audacious and he
offers a new tonality that is very strange, a sense of dismantling that is simultaneously that of a judge and that of an engineer, a veritable feeling, a Gemut.
Fear, flight, dismantling—we should think of them as three passions, three intensities, correponding to the diabolical pact, to the becoming-animal, to the
machinic and collective assemblages.
    So, should we support realist and social interpretations of Kafka? Certainly,
since they are infinitely closer to noninterpretation. And it is much more worthwhile to talk about the problems of minor literature, about the situation of a Jew
in Prague, about America, about bureaucracies and about great trials, than to
talk about an absent God. One could object that Kafka's America is unreal, that
the New York strike remains intangible, that the most difficult working conditions receive no indignation in his work, that the election of the judge falls into
the realm of pure nonsense. One might correctly note that there is never any
criticism in Kafka. Even in "The Great Wall of China," the minority party can
even believe that the law is only an arbitrary fact of the "nobility"; the party expresses no anger, and "that is the real reason why the parties who believe tht
there is no law have remained so few —although their doctrine is in certain ways
so attractive, for it unequivocally recognizes the nobility and its right to go on
existing." InK doesn't attack the law and willingly aligns himself with
the strong side and the executioners: he prods Franz who is being whipped; he
terrorizes an accused person by seizing him by the arm; at the lawyer's, he
makes fun of Block. In The Castle, K likes to menace and punish whenever he
can. Can we conclude that, not being a "critic of his time," Kafka turned his criticism "against himself and had no other tribunal than an "internal tribunal"? This
would be grotesque, since it would turn criticism into a dimension of representation. If representation is not external, it can be only internal from here on. But
it's really something else in Kafka: Kafka attempts to extract from social
representations assemblages of enunciation and machinic assemblages and to
dismantle these assemblages. Already in the animal stories, Kafka was drawing
lines of escape; but he didn't "flee the world." Rather, it was the world and its

                          IMMANENCE AND DESIRE O 47

representation that hend that he made follow these lines. It
was a question of seeing and speaking like a beetle, like a dung beetle. Even
more, in the novels, the dismantling of the assemblages makes the social
representation take flight in a much more effective way than a critique would
have done and brings about a deterritorialization of the world that is itself political and that has nothing to do with an activity of intimacy.3
    Writing has a double function: to translate everything into assemblages and
to dismantle the assemblages. The two are the same thing. This is why we have
been distinguishing in Kafka's work instances that are in fact enmeshed in each
other—first,achinlc indexes;abstract machines;e assemblages of the machine.The machinic indexes are the signs of an assemblage that
has not yet been established or dismantled because one knows only the individual
pieces that go into making it up, but not how they go together. Most frequently,
these pieces are living beings, animals, but they are only valuable as moving
pieces or configurations of an assemblage that goes beyond them, and whose
mystery remains because they are only the operators or executors of this assemblage. Thus, the musical dogs are actually pieces of the musical assemblage and
produce a cacaphony by "the lifting and setting down of their feet, certain turns
of the head, their running and their standing still, the position which they [take]
up in relation to one another." But they function only as indexes, since they "[do]
not speak, they [do] not sing, they remain generally silent, almost determinedly
silent." These machinic indexes (which are not at all allegorical or symbolical)
are particularly well developed in the acts of the becoming-animal and in
the animalistic stories. "The Metamorphosis" forms a complex assemblage in
which the index-elements are Gregor-animal and the musical sister; in which the
index-objects are the food, the sound, the photo, and the apple; and in which
the index configurations are the familial triangle and the bureaucratic triangle.
The bent head that straightens up and the sound that latches onto the voice and
derails it also function as indexes of this sort in the majority of the stories. There
is thus a machinic index each time a machine is being built and is beginning to
function, even though one doesn't know how the disparate parts that make it up
and make it work actually function. But the reverse case also appears in the stories: abstract machines surge into existence by themselves, without indexes. But
in this case, they don't function, or no longer function. Such is the machine in
the Penal Colony that answers to the Law of the old warden and doesn't survive
its own dismantling; such is the creature named Odradek about whom "one is
tempted to believe that the creature once had some sort of intelligible shape and
is now only a broken-down remnant. Yet this does not seem to be the
case . . . [T]he whole thing looks senseless enough but in its own way perfectly finished"; such too are Blumfeld's ping-pong balls. Yet it seems also that
the representation of the transcendental law, with its elements of guilt and
unknowability, is an abstract machine of this sort. If the machine of the Penal

                          48 D IMMANENCE AND DESIRE

Colony, as representative of the law, appears to be archaic and outmoded, this
is not because, as people have often claimed, there is a new law that is much
more modern but because the form of the law in general is inseparable from an
abstract, self-destructive machine and cannot develop in a concrete way. This
is why the stories seem to encounter two dangers that make them stop short or
force them to remain incomplete or prevent them from developing into novels:
either they are nothing more than machinic indexes of the assembly, no matter
how lively they appear to be; or they put into operation abstract machines that
are all assembled, but dead, and never succeed in concretely plugging into things
(we should note that Kafka willingly publishes his texts on transcendental law
in short stories that he detaches from the whole).
    Thus there remain machinic assemblages as objects of the novel. This time
the machinic indexes stop being animal; they group, give birth to series, start
proliferating, taking over all sorts of human figures or parts of figures. On the
other hand, the abstract machine changes in a singular fashion. It stops being
reified and isolated; it no longer exists outside the concrete, socio-political assemblages that incarnate it. It diffuses into them and measures their machinic
degree. Finally, the assemblage no longer works as a machine in the process of
assembling itself, with a mysterious function, or as a fully assembled machine
that doesn't function, or no longer functions. It works only through the dismantlingthat it brings about on the machine and on representation.
And, actually functioning, it functions only through and because of its own dismantling. It is born from this dismantling (it is never the assembling of the machine that interests Kafka). This method of active dismantling doesn't make use
of criticism that is still part of representation. Rather, it consists in prolonging,
in accelerating, a whole movement that already is traversing the social field. It
operates in a virtuality that is already real without yet being actual (the diabolical
powers of the future that for the moment are only brushing up against the door).
The assemblage appears not in a still encoded and territorial criticism but in a
decoding, in a deterritorialization, and in the novelistic acceleration of this
decoding and this deterritorialization (as was the case with the German
language—to always go farther in this movement that takes over the whole social
field). This method is much more intense than any critique. K says so himself.
One's goal is to transform what is still only a method (precede) in the social field
into a procedure as an infinite virtual movement that at the extreme invokes the
machinic assemblage of thetrial(proces)s a reality that is on its way and already there.4 The whole of this operation is to be called a Process, one that is
precisely interminable. Marthe Robert underlines the link between the trial and
the procedure, and this is certainly not a mental, psychical, or interior
procedure.
    Here, then, are the new characteristics of the novelistic machinic assemblage
in opposition to the indexes and the abstract machines. These characteristics im-

                          IMMANENCE AND DESIRE D 49

pose not an interpretation or a social representation of Kafka but an experimentation, a socio-political investigation. Since the assemblage functions really in the
real, the question becomes: how does it function? What function does it have?
(Only later will we ask what it consists of and what its elements and its links
are.) Thus, we must follow the movement oft several levels, taking
account of objective uncertainty about the supposed last chapter and of the certainty that the second-to-last chapter, "In the Cathedral" was more or less poorly
placed by Max Brod. According to a first view, everything is false in The Trial:
even the law, in contrast to Kantian law, erects the lie into a universal rule. The
lawyers are false lawyers, the judges are false judges, "oafish inspectors," "corrupt warders," or at the very least are so much subalterns that they hide the real
matters and "the proceedings of an inaccessible justice" that no longer lets itself
be represented. Nonetheless, if this first view is not definitive, this is because
there is a power in the false, and it is bad to weigh justice in terms of true or
false. So the second view is much more important: where one believed there was
the law, there is in fact desire and desire alone.Justice is desire and not law.
Everyone in fact is a functionary of justice—not only the spectators, not only
the priest and the painter, but also the equivocal young women and the perverse
little girls who take up so much space in The Trial. K's book in the cathedral
is not a prayerbook but an album of the town; the judge's book contains only
obscene pictures. The law is written in a porno book. Here, it is no longer a
question of suggesting an eventual falsity of justice but of suggesting its desiring
quality: the accused are in principle the most handsome figures and are recognized for their strange beauty. The judges act and reason "like children." It happens that a simple joke can derout repression. Justice is not Necessity but, quite
the contrary, Chance; and Titorelli paints the allegory of it as a blind fortune,
a winged desire. It is not a stable will but a moving desire. It is curious, K says,
how justice must not move in order to not sway its scales. But the priest explains
at another moment, 'The Court wants nothing from you. It receives you when
you come and dismisses you when you go." The young women are not equivocal
because they hide their nature as auxiliaries of justice; on the contrary, they
show themselves to be auxiliaries because they simultaneously bring bliss to
judges, lawyers, and accused, out of a single and unique polyvocal desire. The
whole ofis overrun by a polyvocality of desire that gives it its erotic
force. Repression doesn't belong to justice unless it is also desire itself—desire
in the one who is repressed as well as in the one who represses. And the authorities of justice are not those who look for offenses but those who are "attracted,
propelled by offense." They nose around, they rummage about, they search
everywhere. They are blind and accept no evidence but take into consideration
only hallway events, the whispers of the courtroom, the secrets of the chambers,
the noise heard behind doors, the murmurs from behind the scene, all those
microevents that express desire and its arbitrary fortunes.

                          50 D IMMANENCE AND DESIRE

    If justice doesn't let itself be represented, that is because it is desire. Desire
could never be on a stage where it would sometimes appear like a party opposed
to another party (desire against the law), sometimes like the presence of the two
sides under the effect of a superior law that would govern their distribution and
their combination. Think of tragic representation as presented by Hegel: Antigone and Creon move on stage as if they were two parties. It is in this way
that K still thinks of justice at his first interrogation. There would be two sides,
two parties, one a little more favorable to desire, the other to the law, and whose
distribution would refer to a superior law. But K notices that it isn't really like
that: the important thing is not what happens in the tribunal or the movements
of the two parties together but the molecular agitations that put into motion the
hallways, the wings, the back doors, and the side chambers. The theater in
Amerika is no more than an immense wing, an immense hallway, that has abolished all spectacle and all representation. And the same thing happens in the political realm (K himself compares the tribunal scene to a political meeting, and,
more specifically, to a meeting of socialists). There also the important thing is
not what happens in the tribunal where people debate only questions of ideology.
Indeed, the law is one of these debated questions; everywhere in Kafka—in The
Trial, in "The Great Wall of China"—the law is examined in terms of its connection to the parties that the different commentators belong to. But politically, the
important things are always taking place elsewhere, in the hallways of the congress, behind-the-scenes of the meeting, where people confront the real, immanent problems of desire and of power-the real problem of justice.
    From this point on, it is even more important to renounce the idea of a transcendence of the law. If the ultimate instances are inaccessible and cannot be
represented, this occurs not as a function of an infinite hierarchy belonging to
a negative theology but as a function of a contiguity of desire that causes whatever happens to happen always in the office next door. The contiguity of the
offices, the segmentalization of power, replaces the hierarchy of instances and
the eminence of the sovereign (already, the castle had revealed itself to be a segmental and contiguous rambling assemblage in the style of the Hapsburg
bureaucracy or the mosaic of nations in the Austrian empire). If everything,
everyone, is part of justice, if everyone is an auxiliary of justice, from the priest
to the little girls, this is not because of the transcendence of the law but because
of the immanence of desire. This is the discovery into which K's investigation
and experimentation very quickly locks itself. While the Uncle pushes him to
take his trial seriously, for example, to see a lawyer and pass through all the
steps of transcendence, K realizes that he should not let himself be represented,
that he has no need of a representative—that no one should come between him
and his desire. He will find justice only by moving, by going from room to
room, by following his desire. He will take control of the machine of expression:
he will take over the investigation, he will write without stop, he will demand

                           IMMANENCE AND DESIRE D 51

 a leave of absence so he can totally devote himself to this "virtually interminable"
 work. It is in this sense that The Trial is an interminable novel. An unlimited
field of immanence instead of an infinite transcendence. The transcendence of
 the law was an image, a photo of the highest places; but justice is more like a
 sound (the statement) that never stops taking flight. The transcendence of the law
 was an abstract machine, but the law exists only in the immanence of the
 machinic assemblage of justice. The Trial is the dismantling of all transcendental
justifications. There is nothing to judge vis-a-vis desire; the judge himself is
 completely shaped by desire. Justice is no more than the immanent process of
 desire. The process is itself a continuum, but a continuum made up of contigui-
 ties. The contiguous is not opposed to the continuous —quite the contrary, it is
 a local and indefinitely prolongable version of the continuous. Thus, it is also
 the dismantling of the continuous-always an office next door, always the con-
 tiguous room. Barnabas "is admitted into certain rooms, but they're only a part
 of the whole, for there are barriers behind which there are more rooms. Not that
 he's actually forbidden to pass the barriers. . . . And you musn't imagine that
 these barriers are a definite dividing-line. . . . [TJhere are barriers he can
 pass, and they're just the same as the ones he's never yet passed." Justice is the
 continuum of desire, with shifting limits that are always displaced.
     It is this procedure, this continuum, this field of immanence that the painter,
 Titorelli, analyzes as unlimited postponement. A central part of The Trial that
 makes Titorelli into a special character of the novel. He distinguishes three theo-
 retical possibilities: definite acquittal, ostensible or superficial acquittal, and un-
 limited postponement. The first case never in fact comes about, since it would
 imply the death or abolition of a desire that would have reached a conclusion.
 On the other hand, the second case corresponds to the abstract machine of law.
 It is defined, in fact, by the opposition of fluxes, the alternation of poles, the
 succession of periods—a counterflux of the law in response to a flux of desire,
 a pole of escape in response to a pole of repression, a period of crisis for a period
 of compromise. We could say that the formal law sometimes retreats into a tran-
 scendence by leaving a field provisionally open to desire, or sometimes makes
 the transcendence emanate hierarchized hypostases that are capable of halting
 and repressing desire (in fact, there are many neo-Platonic readings of Kafka).
 In two different ways, this state, or rather this cycle of superficial acquittal, cor-
 responds to Kafka's situation in the letters or in the animalistic stories or in the
becomings-animal. The trial at the hotel is the counterblow of the law reacting
 to the blow of the letters, a trial of the vampire who well knows that any acquittal
 can be only superficial. And succeeding the positive pole of the line of escape,
 the trial of the becoming-animal is the negative pole of the transcendental law
 that blocks the way out and that dispatches a familial hypostasis to retrap the
 guilty party—the re-Oedipalization of Gregor, the platonic apple that his father
 throws at him.

                           52 D IMMANENCE AND DESIRE

    But this apple is precisely the same one that K eats at the beginning of The
Trial as part of a broken chain that finds its link in "The Metamorphosis." Because the whole story of K revolves around the way in which he enters more
deeply into an unlimited postponement, breaking with all the formulas of a superficial acquittal. He thereby leaves the abstract machine of the law that opposes law to desire, as body is opposed to spirit, as form is opposed to matter,
in order to enter into the machinic assemblage of justice—that is, into the mutual
immanence of a decoded law and a deterritorialized desire. But what do the
terms postponement and unlimited signify? If K refuses a superficial acquittal,
this is not because of a desire for a real acquittal, and even less because of an
intimate hopelessness coming from a guilt that feeds off itself. Guilt is entirely
on the side of a superficial acquittal. We could say that superficial acquittal is
simultaneously infinite, limited, discontinuous. It is infinite because it is circular, closely following "the circulation of the offices" along the path of a large
circle. But it is limited and discontinuous because the point of accusation approaches and recedes in relation to this circulation, "swinging backwards and
forwards with greater or smaller oscillations, longer or shorter delays": opposed
fluxes, opposed poles, opposed periods of innocence, guilt, freedom, and a new
arrest. Since real acquittal is out of the question, the question of innocence "or"
guilt falls entirely within the realm of the superficial acquittal that determines
the two discontinuous periods and the reversal of one into the other. Innocence,
moreover, is a hypothesis that is much more perverse than that of guilt. Innocent
or guilty, this is the question of the infinite; it is certainly not the kind of question
that Kafka raises. In contrast, the postponement is finite, unlimited, and continuous. It is finite because these is no longer any transcendence and because it
works by means of segments; the accused no longer has to undergo "strain and
agitation" or fear an abrupt reversal (no doubt, a circulation remains, but "only
in the small circle to which it has been artifically restricted," and this little circulation is only "ostensible," a residue of the apparent acquittal). Also, the delay
is unlimited and continuous because it doesn't stop adding one segment to the
other, in contact with the other, contiguous to the other, operating piece by piece
in order to always push the limit farther back. The crisis is continuous because
it is always on the side that it takes place. "Contact" with justice, contiguity, have
replaced the hierarchy of the law. The delay is perfectly positive and active—it
goes along with the undoing of the machine, with the composition of the assemblage, always one piece next to another. It is the process in itself, the tracing
of the field of immanence.5 And it is even more evident in The Castle to what
degree K is nothing but desire: a single problem, to establish or maintain "contact" with the Castle, to establish or maintain a "liaison."

Chapter 6
Proliferation of Series

 This functioning of the assemblage can be explained only if one takes it apart
to examine both the elements that make it up and the nature of its linkages. The
characters in The Trial appear as part of a large series that never stops proliferat-
 ing. Everyone is in fact a functionary or a representative of justice (and in The
 Castle, everyone has something to do with the castle), not only the judges, the
lawyers, the bailiffs, the policemen, even the accused, but also the women, the
little girls, Titorelli the painter, K himself. Furthermore, the large series subdivides into subseries. And each of these subseries has its own sort of unlimited
 schizophrenic proliferation. Thus, Block simultaneously employs six lawyers,
and even that's not enough; Titorelli produces a series of completely identical
paintings; and in all of his adventures, K meets curious young women of the
same type (Elsa, his girlfriend before the trial, waitress in a cabaret; Miss Burstner, "a typist who would not resist him for very long"; the washerwoman, the
judge's lover and wife to the bailiff; Leni, the nursemaid-secretary of the lawyer;
and the little girls at Titorelli's place). But the first characteristic of these
proliferating series is that they work to unblock a situation that had closed elsewhere in an impasse.
    Doubles and trios are frequently used by Kafka. They remain distinct from
each other. The triangulation of the subject, familial in origin, consists in fixing
one's position in relation to the two other represented terms (father-motherchild). The doubling of the subject, as subject of enunciation and as subject of
the statement, concerns the movement of the subject in one of its two representatives or in both together: sometimes it is more fraternal—based on shame—than

                                          53

                         54 D PROLIFERATION OF SERIES

paternal; sometimes more professional—based on rivalry —than familial. The
majority of Kafka's doubles center on the theme of the two brothers or the two
bureaucrats, whether one moves and the other remains immobile, or whether
both move with the same movements.1 It is no less true that the duos and trios
interpenetrate. When one of the doubles remains immobile and is content to delegate movement to the other, it seems that this properly bureaucratic inertia has
its origin in the familial triangle insofar as it keeps the child immobile and condemns him to reverie. In this respect, Kafka will say that the bureaucratic spirit
is the social virtue that flows directly from familial education.2 And, in the second case, where the doubles move together, their very activity supposes a third
term such as an office director on whom they depend. It is in this way that Kafka
constantly presents trios, formal bureaucratic triangulations. The two
bureaucrats emanate necessarily from a superior third one, for whom they function as right arm and left arm. Inversely, then, if the bureaucratic double refers
back to the familial triangle, the latter in turn can be replaced by bureaucratic
triangles. And all these lines are very complicated in Kafka. Sometimes, with
the familial triangle as a given, as in "The Metamorphosis," a term of another
sort will come to be added or substituted: the chief clerk arrives behind Gregor's
door and insinuates himself into the family. But sometimes, too, it is a trio of
bureaucrats as a block that move in and take over the terms of the family, even
if only provisionally: the introduction of the chief clerk in "The Metamorphosis"
serves only to prepare for this moment. Sometimes, as in the beginning of The
Trial, there isn't even a preexisting familial triangle (the father is dead, the
mother is faraway), but there is still the intrusion of first one term and then another that function like policing doubles, and then their triangulation by a third
term, the Inspector. We can observe the metamorphoses of this nonfamilial triangle that in turn will become the bureaucratic triangle of the bank employees,
the apartment triangle of the voyeuristic neighbors, and the erotic triangle of
Fraulein Burstner and her friends in a photo.
    These complicated cases we've described have only a single goal—to show
that for doubles as well as for triangles and for their mutual contacts and interpenetrations, something remains blocked. Why two or three and not more? Why
does two refer to three and inversely? What stops another term, such as the sister
in "The Metamorphosis," from doubling and triangulating in his or her own
right? A failing of the letters in this respect, despite Kafka's attempt to introduce
Crete Bloch and to escape from a duel-like relationship. A failing of the
animalistic stories in this respect, despite Gregor's attempt to escape from triangulation. This is one of the main problems resolved by the novels: the doubles
and the triangles that remain in Kafka's novels show up only at the beginning
of the novels; and from the start, they are so vacillating, so supple and transformable, that they are ready to open onto series that break their form and explode their terms. This is the exact opposite of what happens in "The Metamor-

                          PROLIFERATION OF SERIES D 55

phosis," where the sister, as well as the brother, finds herself blocked by a
triumphant return of the most exclusive sort of familial triangle. The question
isn't deciding whether "The Metamorphosis" is a masterpiece. Obviously it is,
but that doesn't help Kafka, since as much as it tells things so well, it prevents
him, or so he believes, from writing a novel. He would never have stood for
writing a familial or conjugal novel, a Saga of the Kafkas, or a Wedding Night
in the Country. Yet already inhe had seen how proliferating series
might be a solution; inand then inhe has a complete grasp
of this solution. But from now on, there will be no reason for a novel to end.
(Unless he does as Balzac, as Flaubert, as Dickens do; but however strong his
admiration for them, he doesn't want any of that. He doesn't want to create a
genealogy, even if it is a social one, a la Balzac; he doesn't want to erect an ivory
tower, a la Flaubert; he doesn't want "blocks," a la Dickens, since he himself
has a very different conception of the block. The only one that he will take as
his master is Kleist, and Kleist also detested masters; but Kleist is a different
matter even in the deep influence that he had on Kafka. We have to speak differently about this influence. Kleist's question isn't, "What is a minor literature and,
further, a political and collective literature?" but rather, "What is a literature of
war?" This is not completely alien to Kafka, but it is not exactly his question.)
    By making triangles transform until they become unlimited, by proliferating
doubles until they become indefinite, Kafka opens up a field of immanence that
will function as a dismantling, an analysis, a prognostics of social forces and
currents, of the forces that in his epoch are only beginning to knock on the door
(literature has a sense only if the machine of expression precedes and anticipates
contents). And, to a certain degree, it is no longer even necessary to make use
of doubles and triangles; a central figure will start proliferating directly —for example, Klamm or, even more so, K himself. Thus, the terms tend to distribute
themselves along a line of escape, to take flight on this line, in relation to the
contiguous segments-police segment, lawyer segment, judge segment, ecclesiastical segment. At the same time that they lose their double or triangular
form, these terms don't appear or don't appear only as the hierarchized representatives of the law but become agents, connective cogs of an assemblage of justice, each cog corresponding to a position of desire, all the cogs and all the positions communicating with each other through successive continuities.
Exemplary in this respect is the scene of the first interrogation in which the tribunal loses its triangular form, with the judge at the top and the sides that split
into a left side and a right side and realign along a single, continuous line that
not merely reunites the two parties but prolongs them by bringing together "oafish Inspectors and Examining Magistrates . . . but also . . . a judicial hierarchy of high, indeed of the highest rank, with an indispensable and numerous
retinue of servants, clerks, police, and other assistants, perhaps even hangmen."
And after this first interrogation, the contiguity of offices comes increasingly to

                          56 D PROLIFERATION OF SERIES

replace the hierarchy of triangles. All the functionaries are "venal," "corrupt."
Everything is desire, the whole line is desire, both in those who dispose of a
power and repress and in those who are accused and undergo power and repression (for example, the accused man, Block: "The man ceased to be a client and
became the lawyer's dog"). One would be quite wrong to understand desire here
as a desireower, a desire to repress or be repressed, a sadistic desiAre and
a masochistic desire. Kafka's idea has nothing to do with this. There isn't a desire
for power; it is power itself that is desire. Not a desire-lack, but desire as a plenitude, exercise, and functioning, even in the most subaltern of workers. Being
an assemblage, desire is precisely one with the gears and the components of the
machine, one with the power of the machine. And the desire that someone has
for power is only his fascination for these gears, his desire to make certain of
these gears go into operation, to be himself one of these gears-or, for want of
anything better, to be the material treated by these gears, a material that is a gear
in its own way.
    If I am not the typist, I am at least the paper that the keys strike. If I am no
longer the machine's mechanic, I am least the living material with which it deals.
Maybe this is a much more essential place, one that is closer to the gears than
is the mechanic (for example, the subaltern officer of the Colony or the accused
people inTheTrial)The question is thus much more complicated than simply
a question about two abstract desires, a desire to repress and a desire to be repressed, which could be put abstractly as a sadistic question and a masochistic
one. Repression, for both the represser and the repressed, flows from this or that
assemblage of power-desire, from this or that state of the machine—since there
is also a need for mechanics as well as materials working in a strange harmony,
in a connection more than in a hierarchy. Repression depends on the machine,
and not the other way around. Thus, there isn't power as if it were an infinite
transcendence in relation to the slaves or the accused. Power is not pyramidal
as the Law would have us believe; it is segmentary and linear, and it proceeds
by means of contiguity, and not by height and farawayness (hence, the importance of the subalterns).3 Each segment is power, a power as well as a figure
of desire. Each segment is a machine or a piece of the machine, but the machine
cannot be dismantled without each of its contiguous pieces forming a machine
in turn, taking up more and more place. Take the example of bureaucracy, since
it fascinates Kafka, since Kafka is himself a bureaucrat of the future, working
in Insurance (and Felice takes care of dictating machines — segmentary meeting
between two components). There isn't a desire for bureaucracy, to repress or to
be repressed. There is a bureaucratic segment, with its sort of power, its personnel, its clients, its machines. Or rather, there are all sorts of segments, contiguous bureaus, as in Barnabas's experience. All the gears, which are in fact equivalent despite all appearances, and which constitute the bureaucracy as desire, that
is, as an exercise of the assemblage itself. The divisions of oppressor and op-

                         PROLIFERATION OF SERIES D 57

pressed, repressers and repressed, flow out of each state of the machine, and
not vice versa. This is a secondary consequence. The secret of The Trial is that
K himself is also a lawyer, also a judge. Bureaucracy is desire, not an abstract
desire, but a desire determined in this or that segment, by this or that state of
the machine, at this or that moment (for example, the segmentary monarchy of
the Hapsburgs). Bureaucracy as desire is at one with the functioning of a certain
number of gears, the exercise of a certain number of powers that determine, as
a function of the composition of the social field in which they are held, the engineers as well as the engineered.
    Milena said of Kafka, "For him life was an absolutely different thing than
what it represented to others. Money, the stock-market, investments, a typewriter, these were so many mysterious things to him . . . so many passionate
enigmas that he admired with a moving naivete because they were commercial."4 Naivete"? Kafka had no admiration for simple technical machines, but he
well knew that technical machines were only the indexes of a more complex assemblage that brings into coexistence engineers and parts, materials and
machined personnel, executioners and victims, the powerful and the powerless,
in a single, collective ensemble—oh desire, flowing out of itself and yet perfectly determined each and every time. In this sense, there is certainly a
bureaucratic eros that is a segment of power and a position of desire. And a capitalist eros. And a fascist eros. All the segments communicate with each other
through variable contiguities. Capitalist America, bureaucratic Russia, Nazi
Germany —in fact, all the "diabolical powers of the future"-are knocking at the
door of Kafka's moment with segmental and contiguous blows. Desire: machines
that dismantle into gears, gears that make up a machine in turn. The suppleness
of the segments, the displacement of the barriers. Desire is fundamentally polyvocal, and its poly vocality makes of it a single and unique desire that flows over
everything. The equivocal women of The Trial don't stop making the judges, the
lawyers, and the accused come in a single act of bliss. And the cry of Franz,
the warder punished for his thefts, the cry that K hears in a lumber room contiguous to the hallway of his office at the bank, seems to "come from some martyred instrument" but it is also a cry of pleasure, not in a masochistic sense but
because the suffering machine is a component of a bureaucratic machine that
never stops creating its own bliss(jouir de soi-meme).
    There is no longer a revolutionary desire that would be opposed to power,
to the machines of power. We noted the deliberate absence of social critique in
Kafka. In Amerika, the most terrible work conditions don't inspire any critique
in K but simply make him more afraid of being excluded from the hotel. Although familiar with the Czech socialist and anarchist movements, Kafka doesn't
follow their path. Passing a worker's march, Kafka shows the same indifference
as K in"They rule the streets, and therefore think they rule the world.
In fact, they are mistaken. Behind them already are the secretaries, officials,

                         58 D PROLIFERATION OF SERIES

professional politicians, all the modern satraps for whom they are preparing the
way to power." The Russian Revolution seems to Kafka to be the production of
a new segment, rather than an overthrowing and a renewal. The expansion of
the Russian revolution is an advance, a segmental push forward, an increase that
doesn't occur without a violent flood. "[The flood of the] Revolution evaporates
and leaves behind only the slime of a new bureaucracy. The chains of tormented
mankind are made out of red tape." Between the Hapsburg bureaucracy and the
new Soviet bureaucracy, there is no question of denying that there has been a
change, there is a new piece in the machine, or rather, a piece has made up an
entirely new machine. "[The Worker's Accident Insurance Institution] is a creation of the labor movement. It should therefore be filled with the radiant spirit
of progress. But what happens? The Institution is a dark nest of bureaucrats, in
which I function as the solitary display-Jew."5 Of course, Kafka doesn't see himself as a sort of party. He doesn't even pretend to be revolutionary, whatever
his socialist sympathies may be. He knows that all the lines link him to a literary
machine of expression for which he is simultaneously the gears, the mechanic,
the operator, and the victim. So how will he proceed in this bachelor machine
that doesn't make use of, and can't make use of, social critique? How will he
make a revolution? He will act on the German language such as it is in Czechoslavakia. Since it is a deterritorialized language in many ways, he will push the
deterritorialization farther, not through intensities, reversals, and thickenings of
the language but through a sobriety that makes language take flight on a straight
line, anticipates or produces its segmentations. Expression must sweep up content; the same process must happen to form. The proliferation of series as they
appear in The Trial plays this role. Since the history of the world is already established, not out of an eternal return but out of the pressure of always new and
always harder segments, he will accelerate the speed of segmentalization, this
speed of segmental production; he will precipitate segmented series, he will add
to them. Since the collective and social machines bring about a massive deterritorialization of man, Kafka will take this process farther, to the point of an absolute molecular deterritorialization. Criticism is completely useless. It is more
important to connect to the virtual movement that is already real even though
it is not yet in existence (conformists and bureaucrats are always stopping the
movement at this or that point). It is not a politics of pessimism, nor a literary
caricature or a form of science fiction.
    This method of segmentary acceleration or proliferation connects the finite,
the contiguous, the continuous, and the unlimited.It has several advantages.
America is in the process of toughening and spreading its capitalism; the decomposition of the Austrian Empire and the rise of Germany are preparing the way
for fascism; the Russian Revolution has quickly produced a new and unanticipated bureaucracy; methods have led to new trialsnouveauprocesans
processus); "anti-Semitism has spread to the working class," and so on. Capital-

                          PROLIFERATION OF SERIES D 59

ist desire, fascist desire, bureaucratic desire, Thanatos also-every thing is banging at the door. Since one can't count on the official revolution to break the
precipitated conjunction of the segments, one will have to count on a literary machine that will anticipate the precipitations, that will overcome diabolical powers
before they become established. Americanism, fascism, bureaucracy —as Kafka
said, it is less a mirror than a watch that is running fast.6 Since there is no way
to draw a firm distinction between the oppressors and the oppressed or between
the different sorts of desire, one has to seize all of them in an all-too-possible
future, hoping all the while that this act will also bring out lines of escape, parade lines, even if they are modest, even if they are hesitant, even if-and especially if—they are asignifying. A little bit like the animal that can only accord
with the movement that strikes him, push it farther still, in order to make it return to you, against you, and find a way out.
    But, in fact, we have entered an entirely different realm than that of the
becoming-animal. It is true that the becoming-animal was already digging a way
out, but the becoming-animal was incapable of going wholeheartedly into it. It
is true that the becoming-animal was already bringing about an absolute deterritorialization, but only through an extreme slowness and only in one of its
poles. It allowed itself then to be recaptured, reterritorialized, retriangulated.
The becoming-animal remained a family affair. With the force of the series or
of the segments, we see something else, much more strange. The movement of
man's deterritorialization that is proper to great machines and that traverses socialism as well as capitalism will come into force at top speed along the entire
series. From then on, desire will function in two coexisting states: on the one
hand, it will be caught up in this or that segment, this or that office, this or that
machine or state of machine; it will be attached to this or that form of content,
crystallized in this or that form of expression (capitalist desire, fascist desire,
bureaucratic desire, and so on). On the other hand and at the same time, it will
take flight on the whole line, carried away by a freed expression, carrying away
deformed contents, reaching up to the unlimited realm of the field of immanence
or of justice, finding a way out, precisely a way out, in the discovery that
machines are only the concretions of historically determined desire and that desire doesn't cease to undo them, straightening its bent head (the struggle against
capitalism, fascism, bureaucracy—a struggle much stronger than if Kafka had
spent his time on a critique). These two coexistent states of desire are the two
states of the law. On the one hand, there is the paranoiac transcendental law that
never stops agitating a finite segment and making it into a completed object,
crystallizing all over the place. On the other hand, there is the immanent schizolaw that functions like justice, an antilaw, a "procedure" that will dismantle all
the assemblages of the paranoiac law. Because, once again, this is what it is all
about-the discovery of assemblages of immanence and their dismantling. To
dismantle a machinic assemblage is to create and effectively take a line of escape

                         60 D PROLIFERATION OF SERIES

that the becoming-animal could neither take nor create. It is a completely different line. A completely different deterritorialization. Let no one say that this line
is present only in spirit, as though writing isn't also a machine, as though it isn't
also an act, even when it is independent of publication. As though the machine
of writing isn't also a machine (no more superstructural than any other, no more
ideological than any other), sometimes taken up by capitalist, fascist, or
bureaucratic machines, sometimes tracing a modest revolutionary line. Let us
note Kafka's constant idea: even with a solitary mechanic, the literary machine
of expression is capable of anticipating or precipitating contents into conditions
that, for better or for worse, concern an entire collectivity. Antilyricism-"grasp
the world" to make it take flight; instead of fleeing it, caress it.7
    These two states of desire or law can be found at several levels. We should
emphasize the fact of these two coexistent states because we cannot say in advance, "This is a bad desire, that is a good desire." Desire is a mixture, a blend,
to such a degree that bureaucratic or fascist pieces are still or already caught up
in revolutionary agitation. It is only in motion that we can distinguish the "diabolism" of desire and its "immanence," since one lies deep in the other. Nothing
preexists anything else. It is by the power of his noncritique that Kafka is so danr
gerous. We can simply say that there are two coexistent movements, each caught
up in the other. One captures desire within great diabolical assemblages, sweeping along in almost the same movement servants and victims, chiefs and
subalterns, and only bringing about a massive deterritorialization of man by also
reterritorializing him, whether in an office, a prison, a cemetery (paranoiac
law). The other movement makes desire take flight through all the assemblages,
rub up against all the segments without settling down in any of them, and carry
always farther the innocence of a power of deterritorialization that is the same
thing as escape (the schizo-law). This is why Kafka's "heroes" have such a curious status in relation to large machines and to assemblages: although the officer
of "The Colony" was in the machine, first as its mechanic and then as its victim,
and although the characters in the novels belong to this or that state of the machine outside of which they lose all their existence, it seems that K and a certain
number of other characters who double him are always in a sort of adjacency
to the machine, always in contact with this or that segment, but also always repelled, always kept outside, moving too fast to really be "captured up." For example, K in The Castle: while it is true that desire has no preexisting criteria,
his wild desire for the segmental castle doesn't prevent him from having an extrinsic position that makes him take flight on an adjacent line. Adjacency—that
is the schizo-law. In the same way, Barnabas the messenger, one of K's doubles
in The Castle, is a messenger only in a self-designated way and must be particularly quick to deliver a message even though the very same quickness excludes
him from official service and its segmental weight. In the same way, the Student,
one of K's doubles in The Trial, never stops misleading the official usher and

                         PROLIFERATION OF SERIES D 61

takes his wife while the usher is delivering a message ("Back again at top speed
and yet the student was here before me"). This coexistence of two states of
movement, two states of desire, two states of law, doesn't signify hesitation but
rather an immanent experimentation that will open up all the polyvocal elements
of desire, in the absence of any transcendental criteria. Contact and contiguity
are themselves an active and continuous line of escape.
    This coexistence of two states appears clearly in the fragment of The Trial
published under the title "A Dream." On the one hand, there is a rapid and joyous sliding movement or deterritorialization that makes everything adjacent even
at the moment when the dreamer seems to have fallen into an abyss ("The paths
there were very winding, ingeniously made and unpractical, but he glided along
one of them as if on a rushing stream with unshaken poise and balance"). On
the other hand, there are these pathways, these equally rapid segments that moment by moment bring about deadly reterritorializations of the dreamer (the
mound in the distance —suddenly closer—the gravediggers-suddenly, the
artist—the embarrassment of the artist-the artist's writing on the tomb—the
dreamer who digs a hole in the ground—his fall). Undoubtedly, this text sheds
some light on the false ending of The Trial, that deadly reterritorialization of K
in a hard segment, a "loose boulder."
    These two states of movement, of desire or of law, show up again in the example that we started with, photos and bent heads. Because the photo as a form
of expression functioned well as an Oedipal reality, childhood memory, or
promise of conjugality; it captured desire in an assemblage that neutralized it,
reterritorialized it, and cut it off from all its connections. It marked the defeat
of metamorphosis. Thus, the form of content that corresponded to it was the
head that was bent as an index of submission, the gesture of one who is judged
or even of one who judges. But in The Trial, we see a proliferating power of
the photo, of the portrait, of the image. The proliferation starts at the beginning,
with the photos in Fraulein Burstner's room—photos that have the power to
metamorphose those who look at them (init's rather the people in
the photo or the portrait who gain the power to metamorphose). From the photos
of Fraulein Burstner, we move to the obscene images in the judge's book, then
to the photos of Elsa that K shows to Leni (as Kafka did with his Weimar photos
in his first encounter with Felice), then to the unlimited series of Titorelli's
tableaux, about which one could say, a la Borges, that they contain so many
differences from each other because they are absolutely identical.8 In short, the
portrait or the photo that marked a sort of artificial territoriality of desire now
becomes a center for the perturbation of situations and characters, a connector
that precipitates the movement of deterritorialization. An expression freed from
its constricting form and bringing about a similar liberation of contents. In fact,
the submission of the bent head connects to the movement of the head that
straightens or that pushes forward—from the judges, whose backs curved against

                         62 D PROLIFERATION OF SERIES

the ceiling tend to push Justice out of the picture, to the artist of "A Dream" who
does not "bend down though he ha[s] to bend forward" in an effort to not walk
on the grave mound. The proliferation of photos and heads opens up new series
and explores uncharted regions that extend as far as the unlimited field of immanence.

Chapter 7
The Connectors

Certain series are composed of special terms. These terms are distributed
throughout the ordinary series, at the end of one series or at the beginning of
another, and so mark the manner in which they link, transform, or proliferate—
the manner in which a segment adds on to another or is born out of another.
These special series are thus composed of remarkable terms that play the role
of connectors, since in each case they augment the connections of desire in the
field of immanence. Thus the sort of young woman that obsesses Kafka and that
K meets in The Castle as well as The Trial. It appears that these young women
are attached to this or that segment: Elsa, the girlfriend of K before his arrest,
is so linked to the banking segment that she knows nothing of the trial —so linked
that K himself, in going to look for her, no longer thinks about the trial and
dreams only of the bank; the washerwoman is linked to the segment of the subordinate functionaries, the bailiff, and the judge; Leni is linked to the segment of
the lawyers. In The Castle, Frieda is linked to the segment about the secretaries
and the functionaries; Olga to the segment about the servants. But the remarkable role that each of these women assumes in her respective series causes them
together to constitute an extraordinary series that proliferates in its own way,
that traverses and resonates through all the segments. Not only is each one at
the turning point of several segments (thus Leni simultaneously caresses the lawyer, the accused man, Block, and K), but there is even more: each, from her
point of view in this or that segment is in "contact," in "connection," in "contiguity," with the essential—that is, with the castle, with the trial, as ultimate
powers of the continuous. (Olga says, "It is not only through the servants them-

                                        63

                             64 D THE CONNECTORS

selves that I have a connection with the Castle . . . Perhaps [my father] will
forgive me, too, for accepting money from the servants and using it for our family.") Thus, each of these women can propose aid to K. In the desire that animates them, as in the desire that they incite, they provide the deepest evidence
of the identity of justice, of desire, and of the young woman or the young girl.
The young woman resembles justice: both are without principles. Pure chance,
"it receives you when you come and dismisses you when you go." As a short
proverb in the Castle's village says, "The decisions of the administration are as
timid as young girls." K says to Jeremy who is running toward the functionaries'
hotel, "Is it a sudden desire for Frieda that's seized you? I've got it as well, so
we'll go together side by side." K can be denounced, sometimes as a lewd figure,
sometimes as a cupid or interested figure, and that is the way justice works. One
can put it best by saying that social investments are themselves erotic and, inversely, that the most erotic of desires brings about a fully political and social
investment, engages with an entire social field. And the role of the young girl
or young woman ends when she breaks a segment, makes it take flight, makes
it flee the social field in which she is participating, makes it take flight on the
unlimited line in the unlimited direction of desire. Through the tribunal door
where the student is violating her, the washerwoman makes everything take
flight—K, the judge, the audience, the session itself. Leni makes K flee from
the room where the uncle, the lawyer, and the boss are speaking, but in taking
flight, he gains more control over his trial. It is almost always a woman who
finds the service door, that is, who reveals the contiguity of that which one had
thought to be faraway and who restores or installs the power of the continuous.
The priest in The Trial reproaches K about this: "You cast about too much for
outside help, especially from women."
    What, then, is this genre of women with dark, sad eyes? They have their
necks bare, uncovered. They call you, they press against you, they sit on your
knees, they take your hand, they caress you and are caressed by you, they kiss
you and mark you with their teeth or, in contrast, are marked by yours, they
violate you and let themselves be violated, sometimes they suffocate you and
even beat you; they are tyrannic but they let you go or even make you go, they
chase you and always send you off. Leni has webbed fingers like some sort of
leftover from a becoming-animal. But women present an even more precise
blend of things; they are part sister, part maid, part whore. They are anticonjugal and antifamilial. Already we can see this in the stories: the sister in "The
Metamorphosis," who has become a lowly worker in a store, becomes a maid
for Gregor-insect, prevents the mother and the father from coming into the
room, and turns against Gregor only when he shows himself to be too attached
to the portrait of the lady in fur (then, the sister lets herself be taken up again
by the family at the same time as she decides Gregor's death). In "Description
of a Struggle," it is a maid, Annette, who starts everything going. In "A Country

                              THE CONNECTORS D 65

Doctor," the groom attacks Rosa, the young maid, much as the student in The
Trial had attacked the washerwoman, and imprints on her cheeks his "two rows
of teeth"—while a sister discovers a mortal wound in her brother's side. But there
is an even greater development of these young women in the novels. In Amerika,
it is a maid who violates K and brings about his exile as a first deterritorialization
(there is a scene of suffocation that is fairly analogous to the suffocation Proust's
narrator feels when he kisses Albertine). Then, there is a sort of coquettish sister, ambiguous and tyrannical, who catches K in various judo holds and who is
at the center of the break with the uncle, the second deterritorialization of the
hero (in The Castle, it is Frieda herself who, not out of simple jealousy but out
of a judgment of the law, will directly cause the break by referring to a major
infidelity of K's, because K preferred his "contacts" with Olga or with the Olga
segment). The Trial and The Castle multiply these women who in various ways
reunite the qualities of sister, maid, and whore. Olga, the prostitute of the castle's servants, and so on. Minor qualities of minor characters—part of the project
of a literature that wants to be deliberately minor and draws its revolutionary
force from that.
    The three qualities correspond to three components of the line of escape as
well as to three degrees of freedom: freedom of movement, freedom of the statement, freedom of desire. First, there are the sisters. Since they belong to the
family, they have the greatest desire of making the familial machine take flight.
"In the past, especially, the person I am in the company of my sisters has been
entirely different from the person I am in the company of other people. Fearless,
powerful, surprising, moved as I otherwise am only when I write."1 (Kafka always defined literary creation as the creation of a desert world populated by his
sisters where he would enjoy an infinite liberty of movement). Second, there are
the maids, lowly employees, and so on. Already caught in a bureaucratic machine, they have the greatest desire of making it take flight. The sound of maids
is neither signifying nor musical; it is that sound born of silence, which Kafka
looked for everywhere, where the utterance is already part of a collective assemblage, a collective complaint, without a subject of enunciation that hides itself
or deforms. A pure, moving material of expression. From this comes their quality as minor characters, all the more open to treatment by literary creation:
"These silent underdogs do everything one supposes them to be doing . . . If
I imagine that he is looking at me insolently, then he really is."2Third, there are
the whores. Maybe for Kafka they are at the intersection of all the machines —
familial, conjugal, bureaucratic-that they are all the more able to make take
flight. The choking or erotic asthma that they cause doesn't come only from their
pressure and their weight on their clients, which doesn't last a very long time,
but from the fact that with them, one penetrates deeper along a line of escape,
"farther than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even
the air had any thing in common with his native air, where one might die of

                              66 n THE CONNECTORS

strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and
lose oneself further."3 But none of these elements have any value by themselves;
all three are needed at the same time, in the same character if possible, in order
to form the strange combination that Kafka so dreams about. To take her for a
maid, but also for a sister, and also for a whore.4
    This combined formula, which has value only as an ensemble, is that of
schizo-incest. Psychoanalysis, because it understands nothing, has always confused two sorts of incest: the sister is presented as a substitute for the mother,
the maid as a derivative of the mother, the whore as a reaction-formation. The
group of "sister-maid-whore" will be interpreted as a kind of masochistic detour
but, since psychoanalysis also doesn't understand anything about masochism, we
don't have to worry much about that either.
    (A short parenthesis on masochism. Kafka shares nothing with masochism as
it is described in books of psychoanalysis. The observations of psychiatry in the
nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries give a much more correct
clinical picture of masochism. Kafka thus could have something in common with
the real cartography of masochism and with Sacher-Masoch, whose themes
show up in many masochists, even when these themes are effaced in modern interpretations. We can cite at random: the pact with the devil, a masochistic "contract" that opposes the conjugal contract and works to wish it away; the admiration for, and necessity of, vampirish letters —sometimes the letters controlled by
Masoch, sometimes the classified ads put in the newspapers, Masoch-Dracula;
the becoming-animal, for example, in Masoch, the becoming-bear or fur that has
nothing to do with the father or the mother; the interest in maids and whores;
the agonizing reality of prison, which is explained not only by the fact that
Masoch's father was a prison director but also because, as a child, Masoch saw
prisoners and frequented prisons—he made himself a prisoner to acquire the
maximum degree of farawayness or the excess of contiguity; historical
investment—Masoch thought about writing the cycles and segments of a history
of the world by emphasizing in his own way the long history of oppressions;
the decisive political intention —Masoch, who had a Bohemian origin, was also
connected to the same minorities of the Austrian empire as Kafka, a Czech Jew.
The fascination of Masoch for the Jews in Poland, in Hungary. Maids and
whores form part of these minorities, these class struggles, even if necessarily
within the family and conjugality. Masoch, too, builds a minor literature that is
his very life, a political literature of minorities. One might object that a masochist is not necessarily central to the Hapsburg empire at the moment of its great
dissolution. Of course-but he always has the possibility to build a minority
literature within his own language and to be all the more political in that activity;
he finds means of expression based on his form of genius, through an archaic,
symbolist, and stereotyped utilization of language or, on the contrary, through
a sobriety that pulls from the language a pure complaint and provocation. It is

                              THE CONNECTORS D 67

true that masochism is not the only method. It is even a weak method. It is all
the more interesting to compare masochists and Kafkians, noting their differences, noting their unequal utilizations of the name, but also noting the similarities of their respective projects.)
    What is this combined sort of schizo-incest? It is opposed in numerous ways
to a neurotic Oedipal incest. The Oedipal incest occurs, or imagines that it occurs, or is interpreted as if it occurs, as an incest with the mother, who is a territoriality, a reterritorialization. Schizo-incest takes place with the sister, who
is not a substitute for the mother, but who is on the other side of the class struggle, the side of maids and whores, the incest of deterritorialization. Oedipal incest corresponds to the paranoiac transcendental law that prohibits it, and it
works to transgress this law, directly if it can bear to do so, symbolically for
want of anything better: demented father (Kronos, the most honest of fathers,
as Kafka said); abusive mother; neurotic son—before becoming paranoiac in
turn and before everything starts up again in the familial-conjugal triangle—
since in fact such transgression is nothing but a simple means of reproduction.
Schizo-incest corresponds, in contrast, to the immanent schizo-law and forms
a line of escape instead of a circular reproduction, a progression instead of a
transgression (problems with the sister are certainly better than problems with
the mother as schizophrenics well know). Oedipal incest is connected to photos,
to portraits, to childhood memories, a false childhood that never existed but that
catches desire in the trap of representation, cuts it off from all connections, fixes
it onto the mother to render it all the more puerile or spoiled, in order to have
it support all the other, stronger interdictions and to prevent it from identifying
itself as part of the social and political field. Schizo-incest, in contrast, is connected to sound, to the manner in which sound takes flight and in which
memory-less childhood blocks introduce themselves in full vitality into the present to activate it, to precipitate it, to multiply its connections. Schizo-incest with
a maximum of connection, a polyvocal extension, that uses as an intermediary
maids and whores and the place that they occupy in the social series—in opposition to neurotic incest, defined by its suppression of connection, its single signifier, its holding of everything within the limits of the family, its neutralization
of any sort of social or political field. The opposition appears clearly in "The
Metamorphosis," between the woman with the covered neck, as she appears in
the photo as an object of Oedipal incest, and the sister, with her neck uncovered,
playing the violin, an object of schizo-incest (should one stick to the photo or
grab onto the sister?).
    We can well understand the connective function of these women at the beginning of The Trial where "a young woman with sparkling black eyes who was
washing children's clothes in a tub" indicates "with her hand the open door of
the next room" (the same type of linkage occurs in the first chapter of The Castle). The women have a multiple function. The women mark the start of a series

                              68 D THE CONNECTORS

or the opening of a segment that they belong to; they also mark its end, whether
K abandons them or whether they abandon K, since he has gone elsewhere without their even knowing it. They thus function as a sort of signal that one approaches and moves away from. But, above all else, each has precipitated her
own series, her segment in a castle or a trial, by eroticizing it; and the following
segment will only begin or end, will only be precipitated, through the action of
another young woman. Powers of deterritorialization, they nonetheless operate
within a territory beyond which they will not pursue you. We also have to watch
out for two false interpretations concerning them: one, in the style of Max Brod,
would have their erotic quality be no more than the superficial sign of a paradox
of faith, a sort of Abraham's sacrifice; the other, picked up by Wagenbach,
recognizes the real erotic character but only to see in it a factor that delays K
or turns him away from his goal.5 If there is an attitude that resembles Abraham's, at most it is that of the American uncle who brings about K's abrupt sacrifice. And, undoubtedly, this attitude becomes clearer in The Castle, where it is
Frieda who brings about the same sacrifice by reproaching K for his "infidelity."
But this infidelity comes from the fact that K has already moved into another
segment, marked by Olga, whose arrival Frieda caused at the same time that she
caused the termination of her own segment. Thus, women don't function to detour or delay events at the trial or in the castle: they bring about the deterritorialization of K by making territories, which each one marks in her own way,
rapidly come into play (Leni's "odor like pepper," Olga's household odor: the
leftovers of the becoming-animal).
    But schizo-incest is not complete without another element—a sort of homosexual effusion. There again, in opposition to an Oedipal homosexuality, this is
a homosexuality of doubles, of brothers or of bureaucrats. The mark of this
homosexuality shows up in the famous, tight clothes that Kafka so loved: Arthur
and Jeremy, the two doubles in The Castle who frame the love of K and Frieda,
come quickly forward "in tight fitting clothes"; the subaltern servants don't have
uniforms but "clothes so close-fitting [that] a peasant or a handworker couldn't
make use of them"; Barnabas's desire is mediated by the intense desire for tight
clothing, and his sister, Olga, will make some for him. The two policemen at
the beginning of The Trial, who observe Fraulein Burstner's photo, wear "a
closely fitting black suit furnished with all sorts of pleats, pockets, buckles, and
buttons, as well as a belt, like a tourist's outfit, and in consequence looks eminently practical, though one could not quite tell what actual purpose it serves."
And these two policemen will be whipped by an executioner "sheathed in a sort
of dark leather garment which left his throat and a good deal of his chest and
the whole of his arm bare." Today still, these are the clothes of American sadomasochists, dressed in leather or rubber, with folds, buckles, piping, and so on.
But it seems that bureaucratic or fraternal doubles themselves function as homosexual indexes only. Homosexual effusion has another finality that is no more

                              THE CONNECTORS D 69

than pointed to by these indexes. In "Memoirs of the Kalda Railroad," the narrator has a manifest homosexual relationship with the inspector ("We fell together
in an embrace that often lasted ten hours unbroken"). But this relationship will
find its real end only when the inspector is replaced by the artist. Some of the
passages in The Trial on Titorelli will be deleted by Kafka because of their explicitness: "K remained on his knees before him . . . carressed his cheeks,"
and Titorelli pulls K along like a "light boat on the waves," initiating him into
the secrets of the tribunal; the light changes direction and strikes him directly
on his face "like a blinding cataract."6 Similarly, in "A Dream," the artist breaks
away from the two funereal bureaucratic doubles who come out of the bushes,
"drawing figures in the air," entering with K into a relationship of tacit effusion.
    Thus, the artist, too, functions as a remarkable element. The homosexual
relationship with the artist is connected to the incestuous relationship with the
young women or the little sisters (hence, the series of the perverse, voyeuristic
girls who see or hear everything going on at Titorelli's and who start yelling
when K takes off his vest, "He's taken off his jacket now"). But this is not the
same sort of relationship. We have to distinguish three active elements: (1) the
ordinary series, where each series corresponds to a determined segment of the
machine and where the terms are constituted by proliferating bureaucratic doubles with all the marks of homosexuality (for example, the series of porters, the
series of servants, the series of functionaries; note the proliferation of the
Klamm's doubles in The Castle); (2) the remarkable series of young women,
where each corresponds to a point that stands out from the ordinary series,
whether at the opening of the segment, at its end point, or at a point of internal
rupture, but always involved with an increase of valency and connection, a passage which precipitates into another segment (this is the function of eroticization
or of schizo-incest); (3) the singular series of the artist, manifestly homosexual,
which possesses the power of the continuous and which overflows all the segments and sweeps up all the connections. Whereas the young women ensure or
"aid" K's deterritorialization by making him flee from segment to segment, the
closest light always coming from behind him from a candle or a candelabra, the
artist in contrast ensures a shifting and continuous line of flight where light
comes from in front like a cataract. Whereas the young women are to be found
at the principal points of connection for the pieces of the machine, the artist reunites all these points, arranges them in his own specific machine which extends
across the whole field of immanence, and even anticipates it.
    The points of connection between series or segments, the remarkable points
and the singular points, seem in several respects to be asthetic impressions. They
are often sensible qualities, odors, lights, sounds, contacts, or free figures of the
imagination, elements from a dream or a nightmare. They are connected to
chance. For example, in the fragment "The Substitute," three points of connection intervene: the portrait of the king, the little bit of the phrase that the anar-

                              70 D THE CONNECTORS

chist is supposed to have pronounced ("Hey, you up there, bandit!), the popular
song ("While the little lamp is burning"). They intervene to determine new
couplings, and cause the proliferation of series; and the substitute notes that they
can enter into innumerable poly vocal combinations, forming segments that are
more or less near each other, more or less distant.7 But it would be a great error
to refer the points of connection to the aesthetic impressions that subsist in them.
Everything Kafka does works to an exactly opposite end, and this is the principle
behind his antilyricism, his anti-aestheticism: "Grasp the world," instead of extracting impressions from it; work with objects, characters, events, in reality,
and not in impressions. Kill metaphor. Aesthetic impressions, sensations, or imaginings still exist for themselves in Kafka's first essays where a certain influence of the Prague school is at work. But all of Kafka's evolution will consist
in effacing them to the benefit of a sobriety, a hyper-realism, a machinism that
no longer makes use of them. This is why subjective impressions are systematically replaced by points of connection that function objectively as so many signals in a segmentation, so many special or singular points in a constitution of
series. To speak here of a projection of phantasms would be to compound the
error. These points coincide with the female characters or the artist characters,
but all these characters exist only as objectively determined pieces and cogs of
a machine of justice. The substitute knows quite well that the three elements can
only find their connection and realize the ambiguity of their connection, the multiplicity of their connection, in a process that he engages in a perverse learning
of. He is the veritable artist. A process or, as Kleist would say, a life-plan, a
discipline, a method, not at all a phantasm. Titorelli himself, in the singularity
of his position, is still part of the field of justice.8 The artist is nothing like an
aesthete, and the artist machine, the machine of expression, has nothing to do
with artistic impressions. Moreover, insofar as such impressions can still be
found to operate in female or artistic connections, the artist himself is only a
dream. The formula of the artist machine or of the machine of expression must
be defined in a completely different way, then, not only independently of any
aesthetic intention but also beyond the female characters and the artist characters
who intervene objectively in the series or at the limit of the series.
    In fact, these connector characters, with their connotations of desire, incest,
or homosexuality, receive their objective nature from the machine of expression,
and not the other way around: these are contents drawn along by the machine
of expression, and not the other way around. No one knew better than Kafka
to define art or expression without any sort of reference to the aesthetic. If we
try to sum up the nature of the artistic machine for Kafka, we must say that it
is a bachelor machine, the only bachelor machine, and, as such, plugged all the
more into a social field with multiple connections.9 Machinic definition, and not
an aesthetic one. The bachelor is a state of desire much larger and more intense
than incestuous desire and homosexual desire. Undoubtedly, it has its problems,

                               THE CONNECTORS D 71

its weaknesses, such as its moments of lowered intensity: bureaucratic mediocrity, going around in circles, fear, the Oedipal temptation to lead the hermit's
life ("[H]e can live only as a hermit or a parasite"), and, even worse, the suicidal
desire for self-abolition ("His nature is suicidal, therefore, he has teeth only for
his own flesh and flesh only for his own teeth"). But, even with these downfalls,
it is a production of intensities ("The bachelor has only the moment"). He is the
deterritorialized, the one who has neither "center" nor "any great complex of
possessions": "[H]e has only as much ground as his two feet take up, only as
much of a hold as his two hands encompass, so much the less, therefore, than
the trapeze artist in a variety show, who still has a safety net hung up for him
below." His trips aren't those of the bourgeoisie on an ocean-liner, "with much
effect, roundabout," a package tour, but the schizo-voyage, "on a few planks of
wood that even bump against and submerge each other." His voyage is a line
of escape, like a "weathervane on a mountain." And, undoubtedly, this flight
takes place in place, in a pure intensity ("He lay down, as children now and then
lie down in the snow in winter in order to freeze to death"). But even in place,
the flight doesn't consist in fleeing the world, in taking refuge in the tower or
in the phantasm or in impression—flight can alone keep "him on the tips of his
toes and only the tips of his toes could have kept him on the earth." There is nothing less aesthetic than the bachelor in his mediocrity, but there is nothing more
artistic. He doesn't flee the world; he grasps it and makes it take flight on a continuous and artistic line: "I must just take my walks and that must be sufficient,
but in compensation there is no place in all the world where I could not take my
walks." With no family, no conjugality, the bachelor is all the more social,
social-dangerous, social-traitor, a collective in himself ("We are outside the law,
no one knows it and yet everyone treats us accordingly"). This is the secret of
the bachelor: his production of intensive quantities-the lowest as in "little dirty
letters," the highest as in the unlimited oeuvre He produces this production of
intensive quantities directly on the social body, in the social field itself. A single,
unified process. The highest desire desires both to be alone and to be connected
to all the machines of desire. A machine that is all the more social and collective
insofar as it is solitary, a bachelor, and that, tracing the line of escape, is equivalent in itself to a community whose conditions haven't yet been established. Such
is the objective definition of the machine of expression, which, as we have seen,
corresponds to the real state of a minor literature where there is no longer any
"individual concern." Production of intensive quantities in the social body,
proliferation and precipitation of series, polyvalent and collective connections
brought about by the bachelor agent—there is no other definition possible for
a minor literature.

Chapter 8
Blocks, Series, Intensities

Everything that we've said about the contiguous and the continuous in Kafka may
seem contradicted, or in any case attenuated, by the role and importance of discontinuous blocks. The theme of blocks is constant in Kafka and seems affected
by an insurmountable discontinuity. There has been a lot of discussion of Kafka's
broken form of writing, of his mode of expression through fragments. "The
Great Wall of China" is precisely the form of content that corresponds to this
expression: scarcely have the workers finished one block then they are sent far
away to do another, leaving gaps everywhere that may never be filled in. Can
we say that this discontinuity is the distinctive feature of the short stories? There
is something deeper at work. Discontinuity imposes itself on Kafka especially
when there is representation of a transcendental, abstract, and reified machine.
In this sense, the infinite, the limited, and the discontinuous are similar. Each
time that power presents itself as a transcendental authority, as a paranoid law
of the despot, it imposes a discontinuous distribution of individual periods, with
breaks between each one, a discontinuous repartition of blocks, with spaces between each one. In fact, the transcendental law can only regulate pieces that revolve around it at a distance from it and from each other. It is an astronomical
construction. It is the formula for ostensible acquittal in The Trial. And that's
what "The Great Wall of China" makes clear: the emperor's council wanted the
fragmentary style for the wall; and the fragments refer so much to the imperial
transcendence and a hidden unity that certain persons feel that the discontinuous
wall will find its only finality in a tower ("First the wall . . . then the tower").
   Kafka will not renounce this principle of discontinuous blocks or distant frag-

                                         72

                        BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES D 73

ments turning around an unknown transcendental law. And why would he renounce it, since it is a state of things, even if superficial (and what is astronomy?), and since this state functions well in his work. But we must connect
it to constructions of another sort, which correspond to the discovery that the
novels make, where K becomes increasingly aware that the transcendental imperial law refers in fact to an immanent justice, to an immanent assemblage of
justice. Paranoid law gives way to a schizo-law; immediate resolution gives way
to an unlimited deferral; the transcendence of duty in the social field gives way
to a nomadic immanence of desire that wanders all over this field. This is made
explicit in "The Great Wall of China," without being developed in any way: there
are nomads who give evidence of another law, another assemblage, and who
sweep away everything in their journey from the frontier to the capitol, the emperor and his guards having taken refuge behind the windows and the screens.
Thus, Kafka no longer operates by means of infinite-limited-discontinuous but
by finite-contiguous-continuous-unlimited. (Continuity will always seem to him
to be the condition of writing, not only for writing the novels but also for writing
the short stories such as "The Verdict." The unfinished work is no longer a fragmentary work but an unlimited one).1
    What happens from the point of view of the continuous? Kafka doesn't abandon the blocks. But we might begin by saying that these blocks, instead of distributing themselves around a circle in which only several discontinuous arches
are traced, align themselves on a hallway or a corridor: each one thereby forms
a segment, which is more or less distant, on this unlimited straight line. But that
doesn't yet bring about a sufficient change. Since they persist, it is the blocks
themselves that have to change their form, at the very least by moving from one
point of view to another. And, in fact, if it is true that each block-segment has
an opening or a door onto the line of the hallway—one that is usually quite far
from the door or the opening of the following block—it is also true that all the
blocks have back doors that are contiguous. This is the most striking topography
in Kafka's work, and it isn't only a "mental" topography: two diametrically opposed points bizarrely reveal themselves to be in contact. This situation shows
up constantly inwhere K, opening the door of a tiny room close to
his office at the bank, finds himself in the judicial site where the two inspectors
are being punished; going to see Titorelli "in a suburb which was almost at the
diametrically opposite end of the town from the offices of the court," he notices
that the door at the back of the painter's room leads into precisely the same judicial site. It's the same inTwo blocks on a continuous
and unlimited line, with their doors far from each other, are revealed to have
contiguous back doors that make the blocks themselves contiguous. And even
here we're simplifying things: the hallway can be angled, the little door can be
connected to the line of the hallway, in such a way that things become all the
more surprising. The line of the hallway, the unlimited straight line, can hold

                       74 D BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES

other surprises, since it can connect to a certain degree with the principle of the
discontinuous circle and the tower (as in the villa in Amerika or in the Castle,
which includes a tower as well as a group of small, contiguous buildings).

                        BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES D 75

Let's try to briefly outline these two architectural states:
             State 1                                 State 2

   High-angle or low-angle                 Frontal view, corridor view
   Stairs                                  Low ceiling
   Craning up, craning down                Wide-angle and depth-of-field
   Discontinuity of block-arches           Unlimitedlessness of the
                                              immanent hallway
   Astronomical model                      Earthly or underground model
   Distant and close                       Faraway and contiguous

   Note 1: We want to emphasize that there is simultaneously a real distinction
between the two states of architecture and the possibility of their interpenetration. They are distinct because they correspond to two different bureaucracies—
the old and the new; the old, imperial, despotic, Chinese bureaucracy, the new
capitalist or socialist bureaucracy. They penetrate because the new bureaucracy
doesn't easily bring about new forms: not only do many people "believe" in the
old bureaucracy (the notion of belief in Kafka), but this bureaucracy is not a
mere covering over the new one. The modern bureaucracy is born naturally out
of the old forms which it reactivates and changes by giving them a completely
contemporary form. This is why the two states of architecture have an essential
coexistence, which Kafka outlines in the majority of his texts: the two states
function in each other, and in the modern world. Levels in a celestial hierarchy
and contiguity of virtually underground offices. Kafka himself is at the border
of the two bureaucracies: the insurance company and then the worker's insurance office where he works take care of the business of advanced capitalism,
but they contain the archaic and already outmoded structure of an older capitalism and an older bureaucracy. More generally, it is difficult to believe that
Kafka, always attentive to the 1917 revolution, would not have heard at the end
of his life about the avant-garde and constructivist projects in Russia. Tallin's
project for the Third International was presented in 1920: a spiral tower with
four rotating rooms, each turning at different speeds according to an astronomical model (the legislative branch, the executive branch, and so on). MoholyNagy's project was presented in 1922 in Hungary: people would become "a part
of the function of the tower" which included an external ramp with a guard-rail,
an interior and unprotected spiral called the "athlete's path," an elevator, and a
large motor. A paranoiac avant-garde. It seems that the most modern functionalism more or less voluntarily reactivated the most archaic or mythical forms.
Then, too, there is a mutual penetration of two bureaucracies, that of the past
and that of the future (we're still at this stage today). Realizing this mixture, we
can only distinguish the following as the two poles archaisms with a contemporary functioneofon/nations.It seems to us that Kafka was one of the first

                        76 D BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES

to recognize this historical problem, at least as well as did some of his more "engaged" contemporaries such as the Constructivists and the Futurists. For example, Khlebnikov invents two languages; one can ask to what degree they can rejoin each other, to what degree they differ from each other: the astronomical,
algorithmic, stellar language of pure logic and high formalism, and the underground "zaoum" that works with a pure asignifying material, insensity, sonority,
contiguity. It is as though there were two remarkable bureaucratic styles, each
pushed to its extreme—that is, each following its own line of escape. Even
though his situation is quite different, Kafka's problem is the same and also concerns language, architecture, bureaucracy, lines of escape.
    Note 2: To note the degree to which the two states are mixed we need to cite
in detail the example of the castle. For the castle itself keeps many of the structures that correspond to the first state (height, the tower, hierarchy). But these
structures are constantly modified or effaced to the profit of the second state (arrangement and contiguity of offices with moving boundaries). And, above all
else, the inn for gentlemen from the castle brings about the triumph of the second
state, with its long hallway and its contiguous and dirty rooms where the functionaries work in bed.
    Note 3: All this can explain the interest of Orson Welles for Kafka. Cinema
has a much greater link than theater with architecture (Fritz Lang, architect).
But Welles always brought together two architectural models and consciously
used them. The first model is that of splendors and decadence, of archaisms, but
possessing a completely contemporary function, rise and descent along infinite
stairways, low-angle and high-angle shots. The second model is that of the wideangle and depth-of-field, unending hallways, contiguous traversals.itizen
Kane and The Magnificent Ambersons use the first model whereas The Lady
froanghaies the second. Even though isn't credited to
Welles, it reunites the two models in an astonishing mixture of the sort that
we've been talking about: archaic stairways, the great ferris-wheel sticking up
into the sky, the rhizome-sewers that are barely underground, the contiguity of
the sewer pipes. Always the infinite paranoiac spiral and the unlimited schizoid
line. The film of The Trial is even better at combining the two movements; and
a scene like that of Titorelli—the little girls, the long hallway in wood, long
 shots, and sudden contiguities-shows the affinity of Welles's genius with
Kafka.
    Note 4: Why have we aligned the faraway and the contiguous (the second
state), on the one hand, withtheistante (the first state), on the
other? It has nothing to do with the words; we could have chosen others: it is
a question of experimentation and concepts. In the architectural figures of the
great wall and the tower, it is true that the blocks that form arches of the circle
are close to each other-they join up by forming couples. It is also true that they
remain distant from each other, since gaps that will never be filled remain be-

                       BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES D 77

tween them. Furthermore, the transcendental law, the infinite tower, is infinitely
distant from each block; and, at the same time, it is always very close and never
ceases to send its messager to each block, bringing one near the other when it
moves away from the other, and so on. The infinitely distant law emits
hypostases, sends emanations that always come closer and closer. Sometimes
distant, sometimes close, it is the formula for the periods or successive phases
of superficial acquittal. Simultaneously distant and close, it is the formula for
the law that rules these periods and these phases (isn't the great paranoiac always
on our case and yet infinitely distanced from us?). The text from "The Great
Wall of China," "An Imperial Message," sums up this situation: the emperor is
close to each of us and sends us his emanation but he is no less the All Distant
One, since the messenger will never arrive-too many places to cross, too many
things in the way, themselves distant from each other. However, on the other
side, there is faraway and contiguous. Faraway is opposed to close, contiguous
is opposed to distant. But in the grouping of experiences and concepts, faraway
is equally opposed to distant, contiguous opposed to close. In fact, the offices
are very far from each other because of the length of the hallway that separates
them (they aren't very close), but they are contiguous because of the back doors
that connect them along the same line (they aren't very distant). The essential
text in this respect would be the short aphorism where Kafka says that the contiguous village is at the same time so faraway that it would take a lifetime to reach
it. Kafkaesque problem: must we "believe" that this text says the same thing as
the imperial messenger? Shouldn't we believe rather that it says the exact opposite? Because close and distant belong to the same dimension—height—
dominated by the axis of a movement that traces the figure of a circle where a
point distances itself from others and approaches them. But contiguous and faraway belong to another dimension-length—the rectilinear straight line, transversal to the trajectory of movement, that brings into contiguity the most separated
segments. To put this more concretely, we could say that the mother and the father, as in "The Metamorphosis," are close and distant: they are emanations of
the law. But the sister is not close: she is contiguous-contiguous and faraway.
Or take the case of bureaucracy: the bureaucratic Other is always contiguous—
contiguous and faraway.
    The two functioning architectural groups thus take shape in the following
way: on the one hand, infinite-limited-discontinuous-close and distant; on the
other hand, unlimited-continuous-finite-faraway and contiguous. Yet, in both
cases, Kafka proceeds by blocks. Blocks —the thing and the word show up all
the time in the Diaries, sometimes to designate unities of expression, sometimes
to designate unities of content, and sometimes to mark a flaw, sometimes to
mark a virtue. For example, virtue consists in "preserving all [my] powers in
[a block]."2 But the problem is that there are also blocks that are artificial or
stereotypical. Kafka finds Dickens's work, which he very much admires and

                        78 D BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES

takes as the model for Amerika, to have this quality. His admiration is tempered
by his estimation of the ways blocks are constituted in Dickens: "These rude
characterizations which are artificially stamped on everyone and without which
Dickens would not be able to get on with his story even for a moment."3 In
Kafka's work, we can see how the blocks change their nature and function, tending toward a utilization that is increasingly sober and polished. First of all, there
are the blocks that correspond to the fragmentary construction of the Great Wall
of China: separated blocks that are distributed in discontinuous arches of the circle (block-arches). In a second situation, the blocks are well determined segments that are already aligned on an unlimited straight line, but with variable
intervals: this is the composition in Amerika, from the point of view of expression, as well as that of contents, the villa, the hotel, the theater (block-segments).
But The Trial brings a new perfection to the method: the contiguity of the
offices. The segments on the unlimited straight line become contiguous, even
though they are quite separated from each other; they also lose their exact
boundaries to the benefit of moving frontiers that shift and come together with
them in a continuous segmentation (block-series). Without a doubt, this
topographical perfection is taken to its highest degree in The Trial, even more
so than in The Castle. But, inversely, The Castle brings about another sort of
progress by breaking away from that which was too spatial in The Trial in order
to bring out what was already there but still too covered up by spatial figures:
the series become intensive, the journey reveals itself as an intensity, the map
is a map of intensities, and the moving frontiers are themselves thresholds
 (blocks of intensity).he whole first chapter ofworks in this mode,
from threshold to threshold, from low intensities to high ones and vice versa,
part of a cartography that is certainly not interior or subjective but that has
definitely ceased to be spatial. The low intensity of the bent head, the high intensity of the head that straightens and the sound that takes flight, a passage from
one scene to another by thresholds: a language that has become intense makes
its contents take flight in place on this new map.
    This implies a certain method, both a procedureof expression
and an operation (precede) of content. This method was already present in
Amerika and in The Trial. But it now emerges with a specific force and gives
to the blocks their fifth and final sense—as childhood blocks. Kafka's memory
was never very good; but that's all the better, since the childhood memory is incurably Oedipal and prevents desire and blocks it onto a photo, bends the head
of desire and cuts it off from all its connections (" 'Oh well, memories,' said I.
'Yes, even remembering in itself is sad, yet how much more like its object!").4
Memory brings about a reterritorialization of childhood. But the childhood block
functions differently. It is the only real life of the child; it is deterritorializing;
it shifts in time, with time, in order to reactivate desire and make its connections
proliferate; it is intensive and, even in its lowest intensities, it launches a high

                       BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES D 79

itensity. Incest with the sister and homosexual activity with the artist are examles of such childhood blocks (as the little girl blocks at Titorelli's already
emonstrate). The first chapter of The Castle brings a childhood block into opertion in an exemplary manner when K, at a moment of lowered intensity (his
eception in front of the Castle), relaunches or reactivates the whole structure
y injecting into the castle tower the deterritorializing bell of his native land,
'o be sure, children don't live as our adult memories would have us believe,
or as their own memories, which are almost simultaneous with their actions,
'ould have them believe. Memory yells "Father! Mother!" but the childhood
lock is elsewhere, in the highest intensities that the child constructs with his
isters, his pal, his projects and his toys, and all the nonparental figures through
'hich he deterritorializes his parents every chance he gets. Ah, childhood
5xuality—it's certainly not Freud who gives us the best sense of what that is.
'he child doesn't cease reterritorializing everything back onto his parents (the
hoto); he has need of lowered intensities. But in his activity, as in his passions,
e is simultaneously the most deterritorialized and the most deterritorializing
 gure—the Orphan.5 He also forms a block of deterritorialization that shifts with
me, the straight line of time, coming to reanimate the adult as one animates
  puppet and giving the adult living connections.
   Not only as realities but as method and discipline, the childhood blocks never
[op shifting in time, injecting the child into the adult, or the superficial adult
ito the real child. Yet in Kafka and in his work, this transport produces a very
:range mannerism. This is not the symbolic and allegorical mannerism of the
rague school. This is not the mannerism of those who play at being a child,
lat is, who imitate the child or represent him. It is a mannerism of sobriety
ithout memory, where the adult is captured up in a childhood block without
sasing to be an adult, just as the child can be caught up in an adult block without
sasing to be a child. This is not an artificial exchange of roles. Rather, it is the
rict contiguity of two faraway segments. It's a little like what we saw with the
ecoming-animal: a becoming-child of the adult taking place in the adult, a
ecoming-adult of the child taking place in the child, the two in contiguity.
'astle presents these intensive mannerist scenes well: in the first chapter, the
icn bathe and "roll about in the bath," while the children watch and are "driven
ack by mighty splashes"; and inversely, little Hans, the child of the woman in
lack, "is [impelled] chiefly [by] some such boyish fancy. The seriousness he
winced in everything he did seemed to indicate it"—as adult as only a child can
e (a reference to the bathing scene shows up here). But, already in The Trial,
icre is a great mannerist scene: when the warders are all punished, the whole
jquence is treated as a childhood block; each line shows that these are children
r
  whnutevenifeyareonlyhal
us. It seems in this respect that children, according to Kafka, go farther than
'omen: they form a block of transport and of deterritorialization that is much

                        80 D BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES

more intense than the female series; they are caught up in a mannerism that is
much stronger and an assemblage that is much more machinic (for example, the
little girls around Titorelli; and in "Temptation in the Village," the connection
to the woman and to the children have different degrees of complexity). We still
have to refer to another mannerism in Kafka—a sort of worldly mannerism: the
"horrible politeness" of the two gentlemen inwho come to execute K
and to whom K replies by putting on his new gloves; and, then, the manner by
which they move their butcher knife over K's body. The two mannerisms have
complementary and opposed functions: the mannerism of politeness tends to
separate that which is contiguous (Stay back! A bow, a too studied salute, an
overly insistent submission—this can be a way of saying "Shit" to the authorities). The mannerism of childhood works in an inverse way. But, together, the
two mannerisms, the two poles of mannerism, constitute Kafka's schizobuffoonery. Schizophrenics are well acquainted with both mannerisms; that's
their way of deterritorializing social coordinates. It is probable that Kafka made
ample use of them in his life as well as in his work: the machinic art of the marionette (Kafka often talks about his personal mannerisms—the tightening of the
jaw that almost leads to catatonia).6

Chapter 9
What Is an Assemblage?

An assemblage, the perfect object for the novel, has two sides: it is a collective
assemblage of enunciation; it is a machinic assemblage of desire. Not only is
Kafka the first to dismantle these two sides, but the combination that he makes
of them is a sort of signature that all readers will necessarily recognize. Take,
for example, the first chapter ofAmerika, published separately as 'The Stoker."
The chapter considers the boiler room as a machine: K constantly declares his
intention to be an engineer or at least a mechanic. But if the boiler room isn't
described in itself (and, anyway, the boat is in port), that is because a machine
is never simply technical. Quite the contrary, it is technical only as a social machine, taking men and women into its gears, or, rather, having men and women
as part of its gears along with things, structures, metals, materials. Even more,
Kafka doesn't think only about the conditions of alienated, mechanized labor—he
knows all about that in great, intimate detail—but his genius is that he considers
men and women to be part of the machine not only in their work but even more
so in their adjacent activities, in their leisure, in their loves, in their protestations, in their indignations, and so on. The mechanic is a part of the machine,
not only as a mechanic but also when he ceases to be one. The stoker is part
of the "room of machines," even, and especially, when he pursues Lina who has
come from the kitchen. The machine is not social unless it breaks into all its connective elements, which in turn become machines. The machine of justice is a
machine metaphorically: this machine fixes the initial sense of things, not only
with its rooms, its offices, its books, its symbols, its topography, but also with
its personnel (judges, lawyers, bailiffs), its women who are adjacent to the porno

                                         81

                         82 D WHAT IS AN ASSEMBLAGE?

books of the law, its accused figures who make up an interdeterminate material.
A writing machine exists only in an office. The office exists only with its secretaries, its section heads, and its bosses; its social, political, and administrative
distribution; and also its erotic distribution without which there would never
have been any "technics." This is so because the machine is desire-but not because desire is desire of the machine but because desire never stops making a
machine in the machine and creates a new gear alongside the preceding gear,
indefinitely, even if the gears seem to be in opposition or seem to be functioning
in a discordant fashion. That which makes a machine, to be precise, are connections, all the connections that operate the disassembly.
    That the technical machine is only a piece in a social assemblage that it
presupposes and that alone deserves to be called machinic introduces another
point: the machinic assemblage of desire is also the collective assemblage of
enunciation. This is why the first chapter ois filled with the protestations of the German stoker who complains about his immediate superior, a
Rumanian, and about the oppression that the Germans undergo on the boat. The
statement (enonce) may be one of submission, or of protestation, or of revolt,
and so on; but it is always part of the machine. The statement is always juridical,
that is, it always follows rules, since it constitutes the real instructions for the
machine. This is not to say that differences in the statements don't matter; quite
the contrary, it matters a great deal to know if it is a revolt or a petition (Kafka
will say that he is astonished by the docility of injured workers: "They come to
us and beg. Instead of storming the institute and smashing it to little pieces, they
come and beg"1 But whether petition, revolt, or submission, the statement always undoes an assemblage of which the machine is a part; it is itself part of
the machine that will form a machine in turn in order to make possible the functioning of the whole or to modify it or to blow it up. In The Trial, a woman asks
K: Is it reforms that you want to introduce? In The Castle, K situates himself
immediately in a combative relation to the castle (and, in a variant version, the
combat appears even more explicitly). But, in any case, there are rules that tell
how to take things apart and from which one can't really tell if submission
doesn't finally conceal the greatest sort of revolt and if combat doesn't imply the
worst of acceptances. In the three novels, K appears in an astonishing mixture:
he is an engineer or a mechanic who deals with the gears of the machine; he
is a jurist or a legal investigator who follows the statements of the assemblage
(K has to speak only for his uncle, who has never seen him, to recognize him:
"You are my own dear nephew. I suspected it all the time"). There is no
machinic assemblage that is not a social assemblage of desire, no social assemblage of desire that is not a collective assemblage of enunciation.
    Kafka himself is at the border. Not only is he at the turning point between
two bureaucracies, the old and the new, but he is between the technical machine
and the juridical statement. He has experienced their reunion in a single assem-

                          WHAT IS AN ASSEMBLAGE? D 83

blage. In the insurance company, he deals with industrial accidents, the degree
of safety of various types of machinery, boss-worker conflicts, and related
 declarations.2 And certainly, in Kafka's work, it is not only a question of techni-
 cal machines in themselves or of the juridical statement in itself; rather, the tech-
 nical machine furnishes the model of a form of content that is applicable to the
whole social field, whereas the juridical statement furnishes the model for a
 form of expression applicable to any statement. What is essential in Kafka is that
machine, statement, and desire form part of one and the same assemblage that
gives the novel its unlimited motor force and its objects. It is shocking to see
Kafka assimilated by certain critics to the literature of the past even if they allow
 that he used this literature to construct a sort of Summation, a universal Bibliog-
 raphy, a total Oeuvre based on the force of fragments. This is too French a view
of Kafka. No more than Don Quixote does Kafka remain in the world of books.
His ideal library would include only texts for engineers or machinists or jurists
 (plus several authors that he admires for their genius, and also for secret rea-
 sons). His literature is not a voyage through the past but one through our future.
Two problems enthrall Kafka:when can one say that a statement is new?—for
better or for worse—and when can one say that a new assemblage is coming into
 view?—diabolical or innocent, or both at the same time. An example of the first
problem: when the beggar of "The Great Wall of China" brings a manifesto written by the revolutionaries of the adjoining province, the signs utilized "have for
us an archaic character" that make us say, "Ancient history told long ago, old
 sorrows long since healed." An example of the second: the diabolical powers of
the future that are already knocking at the door—capitalism, Stalinism, fascism.
It is that which Kafka listens to, and not the noise of books—the sound of a contiguous future, the murmer (rumeur) of new assemblages of desire, of machines,
and of statements, that insert themselves into the old assemblages and break with
them.
    In what sense is the statement always collective even when it seems to be
emitted by a solitary singularity like that of the artist? The answer is that the
statement never refers back to a subject. Nor does it refer back to a double—that
is, to two subjects, one of which would act as the cause or the subject of enunciation and the other as a function or the subject of the statement. There isn't a subject who emits the statement or a subject about which the statement would be
emitted. It is true that the linguists who make use of this complementarity define
it in a more complex way by considering "the marking of the process of enunciation in the enounced statement" (as in terms like /, you, here, now). But in whatever way this relation is conceived, we don't believe that the statement can be
connected to a subject, doubled or not, divided or not, reflected or not. Let's
return to the problem of the production of new statements and to so-called minor
literature, since this literature, as we have seen, is in an exemplary situation for
the production of new statements. When a statement is produced by a bachelor

                         84 D WHAT IS AN ASSEMBLAGE?

or an artistic singularity, it occurs necessarily as a function of a national, political, and social community, even if the objective conditions of this community
are not yet given to the moment except in literary enunciation. From this arises
two principle theses in Kafka: literature as a watch that moves forward and literature as a concern of the people. The most individual enunciation is a particular
case of collective enunciation. This is even a definition: an statement is literary
when it is "taken up" by a bachelor who precedes the collective conditions of
enunciation. This is not to say that this collectivity that is not yet constituted (for
better or for worse) will in turn become the true subject of enunciation or even
that it will become the subject that one speaks about in the statement: in either
case, that would be to fall into a sort of science fiction. No more than the bachelor, the collectivity is not a subject of enunciation or the statement. But the actual
bachelor and the virtual community—both of them real—are the components of
a collective assemblage. And it is not enough to say that the assemblage
produces the statement as a subject would; it is in itself an assemblage of enunciation in a process that leaves no assignable place to any sort of subject but that
allows us all the more to mark the nature and the function of the statements,
since these exist only as the gears and parts of the assemblage (not as effects
or products).
    This is why it is useless to ask who K is. Is he the same in the three novels?
Is he different in each novel? At the limit, one could say that in his letters, Kafka
makes complete use of the double, of the appearance of two subjects, one of
enunciation and the other of the statement—but he makes use of them only for
a game and a bizarre undertaking, adding the greatest ambiguity to their opposition, having no aim other than to blur the distinction and make them exchange
their respective roles. In the stories, it is already the assemblage that takes the
place of all subjects. But either it is a transcendental, reified machine that keeps
the form of a transcendental subject or it is a becoming-animal that already has
suppressed the problem of the subject but that does no more than point ahead
to the assemblage or it is a molecular becoming-collective that the animal indicates but that still seems to function as a collective subject (the mice people, the
dog people). In his passion for writing, Kafka explicitly conceives of the stories
as a counterpart of the letters, as a means to disavow the letters and the persistent
trap of subjectivity. But the stories are imperfect in this respect, simple stopping
points or breathing spaces. It is with the novels that Kafka reaches the final and
really unlimited solution: K will not be a subject but will be a general function
that proliferates and that doesn't cease to segment and to spread over all the segments. We still have to specify each of these points. On the one hand, general
is not opposed to individual; general designates a function, and the most solitary
individual has a function that is all the more general in that it connects to all the
terms of the series through which it passes. In The Trial, K is a banker and,
through this segment, is in connection with a whole series of functionaries,

                         WHAT IS AN ASSEMBLAGE? D 85

clients, and his girlfriend, Elsa; but he is also arrested and connected to the inspectors, the witnesses, and Fraulein Burstner; and he is accused and connected
to the bailiffs, the judges, and the washerwoman; and he is, in litigation, connected to the lawyers and to Leni; and he is an artist, connected to Titorelli and
the little girls. The general function is inseparably social and erotic-the functional is simultaneously the functionary and desire. On the other hand, it is true
that doubles continue to play a large role in each of these series of the general
function, but they do so as points of departure or as a final homage to the problem of the two subjects; the question of the double is surpassed; and K proliferates without needing to double himself or to make use of doubles. Ultimately,
it is less a question of K as a general function taken up by an individual than
of K asa functioning of a polyvalent assemblage of which the solitary individual
is only a part, the coming collectivity being another part, another piece of the
machine—without our knowing yet what this assemblage will be: fascist?
revolutionary? socialist? capitalist? Or even all of these at the same time, connected in the most repugnant or diabolical way? We don't know, but we have
ideas about all of these—Kafka taught us to have them.
    Why, from this point on, in the assemblage of desire, does the juridical aspect
of the enunciation take over the machinic aspect of the enunciation or of the
thing itself? Or, if it doesn't take it over, it at least precedes it. The respect for
forms in Kafka, the extraordinary respect of the three K's for the great totalities
of America, for the already Stalinist apparatus of justice, for the already fascist
machine of the castle, show no submission but only the exigencies and necessities of a rule of enunciation. It is in this way that Kafka makes use of the law.
The enunciation precedes the statement, not as the function of the subject that
would have produced it but as a function of an assemblage that makes this into
its first gear in order to connect to other gears that will follow and that will be
installed as time goes by. In each series of The Castle or of The Trial, one can
find an enunciation, even if rapid or allusive, that is especially asignifying and
yet that is immanent to the whole series: in the first chapter of The Castle, a
peasant's or teacher's phrase or gesture doesn't form statements, but only enunciations that play the role of connectors. This primacy of the enunciation refers
us once again to the conditions of minor literature: it is the expression that precedes or advances—it is expression that precedes contents, whether to prefigure
the rigid forms into which contents will flow or to make them take flight along
lines of escape or transformation. But this primacy doesn't imply any idealism.
Because the expressions or the enunciations are no less strictly determined by
the assemblage than are the contents themselves. And it is one and the same desire, one and the same assemblage, that presents itself as a machinic assemblage
of content and as a collective assemblage of enunciation.
    The assemblage doesn't have two sides only. On the one hand, it is segmental,
extending itself over several contiguous segments or dividing into segments that

                         86 D WHAT IS AN ASSEMBLAGE?

become assemblages in turn. This segmentalization can be more or less rigid or
supple. But suppleness can be as constraining and more crushing than rigidity,
as inwhere the contiguous offices seem to have movable barriers between them, a fact that renders even more unbearable all of Barnabas's ambition:
always another office after the office that one has entered into, always another
Klamm behind the Klamm that one has already met. The segments are simultaneously powers and territories-they capture desire by territorializing it, fixing it in place, photographing it, pinning it up as a picture, or dressing it in tight
clothes, giving it a mission, extracting from it an image of transcendence to
which it devotes itself to such a degree that it comes to oppose this image to itself. In this sense, we have seen how each block-segment was a concretization
of power, of desire, of territoriality or reterritorialization, regulated by the abstraction of a transcendental law. But we must declare as well that an assemblage
has points of deterritorialization; or that it always has a line of escape by which
it escapes itself and makes its enunciations or its expressions take flight and disarticulate, no less than its contents that deform or metamorphose; or that the assemblage extends over or penetratesanat makes
the segments melt and that liberates desire from all its concretizations and abstractions or, at the very least, fights actively against them in order to dissolve
them. These three things are in fact the same thing: the field of justice against
the transcendental law, the continuous line of escape against the segmentalization of the blocks, the two great points of deterritorialization, one turning the
expressions into a sound that takes flight or into a language of intensities (against
the photos), the other taking the contents "head over heels and away" (against
the bent head of desire). The fact that immanent justice, the continuous line,
points, or singularities are active and creative becomes evident in the way they
assemble (s'agencent) and form a machine in turn. This always takes place as
part of collective conditions, although minor, the conditions of minor literature
and politics, even if each of us had to discover in himself or herself an intimate
minority, an intimate desert (we must note the dangers of a minority struggle—to
reterritorialize, to redo the photos, to remake power and law, to also remake a
"great literature").
    Thus far we have opposed the abstract machine to concrete machinic assemblages. The abstract machine is that of the colony, or of Odradek or Blumfeld's
ping-pong balls. Transcendent and reified, seized by symbolical or allegorical
exegeses, it opposes the real assemblages that are worth nothing except in themselves and that operate in an unlimited field of immanence—a field of justice as
against the construction of the law. But, from another point of view, it would
be necessary to reverse this relationship. In another sense of abstract (a sense
that is nonfigurative, nonsignifying, nonsegmental), it is the abstract machine
that operates in the field of unlimited immanence and that now mixes with it in
the process or the movement of desire: the concrete assemblages are no longer

                          WHAT IS AN ASSEMBLAGE? D 87

that which gives a real existence to the abstract machine by taking away its transcendental pretense; it's almost the reverse now—it's the abstract machine that
measures the mode of existence and the reality of the assemblages in terms of
the capacity that they demonstrate for undoing their own segments, for pushing
farther their points of deterritorialization, for taking flight on the line of escape,
for filling the field of immanence. The abstract machine is the unlimited social
field, but it is also the body of desire, and it is also Kafka's continuous oeuvre
in which intensities are produced and in which are inscribed all sorts of connections and poly valences. Let us cite at random some of Kafka's assemblages (we
don't pretend to be making an exhaustive list, since some group several others
together or are themselves parts of others): the assemblage of letters, the machine for making letters; the assemblage of the becoming-animal, the animalistic
machines; the assemblage of the becoming-female or the becoming-child, the
mannerisms of female blocks or childhood blocks; the large assemblages that
deal with commercial machines, hotel machines, bank machines, judiciary
machines, bureaucratic machines, and so on; the bachelor assemblage or the artistic machine of the minority. We can use several criteria to judge their degree
and mode, even in the smallest details.
    First, to what degree can this or that assemblage do without the mechanism
of transcendental law? The less it can do without it, the less it is a real assemblage; the more it is an abstract machine in the first sense of the word, the more
it is despotic. For example, can the familial assemblage do without a triangulation, can the conjugal assemblage do without a doubling, that make of them legal
hypostases rather than functional assemblages? Second, what is the nature of the
segmentalization proper to each assemblage? More or less hard or supple in the
delimitation of its segments, more or less rapid or slow in their proliferation?
The more the segments are hard or slow, the less the assemblage is capable of
effectively fleeing and following its own line of escape or its points of deterritorialization, even if this line is strong and these points are intense. In this case,
the assemblage functions only as an indication rather than as a real, concrete assemblage: it doesn't succeed in bringing itself into full effect—that is, in rejoining the field of immanence. And whatever the escapes that it indicates, it is condemned to defeat and allows itself to be captured by the preceding mechanism.
For example, the defeat of the becoming-animal especially in "The Metamorphosis" (reconstitution of the familial block). The becoming-female seems much
richer in suppleness and proliferation, and the becoming-child, Titorelli's little
children, is even more so. The childhood blocks or the childish mannerisms in
Kafka seem to have a function of escape or deterritorialization that is more intense than that of the female series. Third, taking into account the nature of its
segmentalization and the speed of its segmentations, what is the ability of an assemblage to overflow its own segments-that is, to spread over the line of escape
and expand over the field of immanence? An assemblage can have a supple and

                         88 D WHAT IS AN ASSEMBLAGE?

proliferating segmentalizaton, and yet be oppressive and exercise a power that
is great, especially since it is not even despotic any more but, rather, really
machinic. Instead of flowing into the field of immanence, it segments this field
in its own way. The false ending of The Trial even brings about a typical sort
of retriangulation. But, independent of this ending, what is the ability of the
Trial assemblage, of the castle assemblage, to open onto a whole field of unlimited immanence that blurs all the segmentary offices and doesn't take place
as a punctual ending but is already at work in each limit and at every moment?
Only under these conditions will it no longer be an abstract machine (abstract
in a primary, transcendental sense) that is realized only in the assemblage but,
rather, will become the assemblage that moves toward the abstract machine (in
a secondary and immanent sense). And fourth, what is the ability of a literary
machine, an assemblage of enunciation or expression, to form itself into this abstract machine insofar as it is a field of desire? The conditions of a minor literature? To quantify Kafka's work would be to play on these four criteria, these
intensive quantities, to produce all the corresponding intensities from the lowest
to the highest: the K function. But that is just what he did, that is precisely his
continuous oeuvre.

Notes

This page intentionally left blank

Notes

                             FOREWORD. THE KAFKA EFFECT

       1. Walter Benjamin, "Franz Kafka," in Illuminations, translated by Harry Zohn, edited and
introduced by Hannah Arendt (New York: Schocken Books, 1969), p. 127. The following passages
from Benjamin's essay will be taken from this edition; page references will appear in the text.
      2. I am referring here to the concept that the Marrocan writer Abdelkebir Khatibi introduces
in his book, Amour Bilingue (Paris: Fata Morgana, 1984).
      3. Gilles Deleuze and Claire Parnet, Dialogues (Paris: Flammarion, Collection Dialogues,
1977), pp. 125-26; see also the important chapter entitled "De la supdriorite de la litterature
anglaise-americaine," pp. 47-63.
      4. See Roland Barthes, Sade, Fourier, Loyola, trans. Richard Miller (New York: Hill and
Wang, 1976).
      5. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Mille Plateaux (Paris: Minuit, 1980), p. 166.
      6. I am referring to the excellent book by Sarah Kofman, Melancolie de Van (Paris: Editions
Galilee, 1985), pp. 26-27.
      7. In a letter cited in the very fine article that Irving Wohlfarth devoted to Benjamin in the
Revue d'Esthetique, new series, no. 1 (Paris: Ed. Privat, 1981). The article is entitled "Sur quelques
motifs juifs chez Benjamin." The extract from the letter that I am using here is found in note 18,
p. 161. Wohlfarth recalls that Gershom Scholem recommended to Benjamin that he "begin every
study on Kafka with the book of Job or at least with a discussion about the possibility of divine judgment": Scholem considered divine judgment to be the "only subject of Kafka's work"!
      8. See p. 122. Maurice de Gandillac, in his translation of Benjamin's text on Kafka ("Kafka,"
in Poesie et Revolution, 2 [Paris: Editions Denoel]), tells us that in the Talmudic tradition the
Halakah is an oral law of which not a single word can be changed; the Haggadah is a free interpretation.
      9. For further reference to these problems, see Wohlfarth's text that I mentioned in note 7,
and the following articles that appear in the same issue of the Revue d'Esthetique: Ju'rgen Habermas,
"L'actualite de Walter Benjamin. La critique: prise de conscience ou preservation," pp. 107-31, and
Yves Kobry, "Benjamin et le langage," pp. 171-79.

                                                   91

                                             92 D NOTES

                           CHAFER 1. CONTENT AND EXPRESSION

     1. The naked or covered female neck has as much importance as the bent or straightened male
head: "the neck encircled by black velour," "the collerette in silk lace," "the collar of fine white silk,"
and so on.
     2. Already, we can find it in a 20 December 1902 letter to a childhood friend, Oskar Pollak:
"[W]hen Shamefaced Lacky stood up from his stool his big angular head went right through the ceiling, and without his particularly wanting to he had to look down on the thatched roofs" (Franz Kafka,
Letters to Friends, Family and Editors, trans. Richard and Clara Winston [New York: Schocken Books,
1977], 6). And in a diary entry for 1913: "To be pulled in through the ground-floor window of a
house by a rope tied around one's neck" (The Diaries of Franz Kafka, trans. Joseph Kresh [New Youk:
Schocken Books, 1948], 1:191).
     3. "Description of a Struggle," in Franz Kafka, Complete Stories (New York: Schocken Books,
1971), 39. (The first part of "Description of a Struggle" continually develops this double movement
of bent head-straightened head and the connections of the latter to sounds.)
     4. Multiple apparitions of the cry in Kafka's work: crying in order to be heard crying-the death
cry of a man enclosed in a room—"[I] screamed aloud, to hear only my own scream which met no
answer nor anything that could draw its force away, so that it rose up without check and could not
stop even when it ceased being audible" ("Unhappiness," in Kafka, Complete Stories, 390-91).
     5. For example, Marthe Robert doesn't simply propose a psychoanalytic Oedipal interpretation
of Kafka; she wants the portraits and the photos to serve as trompe-l'oeil images, the sense of which
can be painfully deciphered. She also wants bent heads to signify impossibles quests. (Oeuvres completes,ercle du livre precieux, 3:380).
     6. "A Report to an Academy," in Kafka259.

                         CHAPTER 2. AN EXAGGERATED OEDIPUS

      1. Max Brod, Franz Kafka: A Biography (New York: Schocken Books, 1960), 20: "Kafka knew
these [Freudian] theories very well and considered them always as a very rough and ready explanation which didn't do justice to detail, or rather to the real heartbeat of the conflict." (Nonetheless,
Brod seems to think that the Oedipal experience does apply to the child and only later finds itself
reworked as a function of the experience of God; pp. 32-33). In a letter to Brod (Kafka, Letters,
November 1917, 167), Kafka says about a particular book of psychoanalysis that, "[I]t shares the
quality of other psychoanalytic works that in the first moments its thesis seems remarkably satisfying, but very soon after one feels the same old hunger."
      2. Gustave Janouch, Conversations with Kafka (London: Andre Deutsch, 1971), 68.
      3. Kafkaanuary 1922, 210.
      4. Theodore Herzl, quoted by Wagenbach, Franz Kafka, Annees de jeunesse (Paris: Mercure,
 1967), 69.
      5. Letter to Brod, in Wagenbach, Franz Kafka, 156: "Diabolical powers, whatever their message might be, brush up against the doors and rejoice already from the fact that they will arrive
soon."
      6. Note, for example, Kafka's enduring disdain for Zionism (as a spiritual and physical reterritorialization): Wagenbach, Franz Kafka, 164-67.
      7. Kafka, Diaries, 29 January 1922, trans. Martin Greenberg (New York: Schocken Books,
1949), 2:215.
      8. There is another version of the same text where it is a question of a sanitarium: compare,
the ape's cough.

                                           NOTES D 93

                     CHAPTER 3. WHAT IS A MINOR LITERATURE?
      1. See letter to Brod, Kafka, Letters, June 1921, 289, and commentaries in Wagenbach, Franz
Kajka, 84.
      2. Kafka, Diaries, 25 December 1911, 194.
      3. Ibid., 193: "[Literature is less a concern of literary history, than of the people."
      4. See "Wedding Preparations in the Country", in Kafka, Complete Stories: "And so long as
you say 'one' instead of'I,' there's nothing in it" (p. 53). And the two subjects appear several pages
later: "I don't even need to go to the country myself, it isn't necessary. I'll send my clothed body,"
while the narrator stays in bed like a bug or a beetle (p. 55). No doubt, this is one of the origins
of Gregor's becoming-beetle in "The Metamorphosis" (in the same way, Kafka will give up going
to meet Felice and will prefer to stay in bed). But in "The Metamorphosis," the animal takes on all
the value of a true becoming and no longer has any of the stagnancy of a subject of enunciation.
      5. See Michel Ragon, Histoire de la litterature proletarienne en France (Paris: Albin Michel,
1974) on the difficulty of criteria and on the need to use a concept of a "secondary zone literature."
      6. KafkaDecember 1911, 193: "A small nation's memory is not smaller than the
memory of a large one and so can digest the existing material more thoroughly."
      7. See the excellent chapter "Prague at the turn of the century," in Wagenbach, Franz Kafka,
on the situation of the German language in Czechoslavakia and on the Prague school.
      8. Constancy of the theme of teeth in Kafka. A grandfather-butcher; a streetwise education at
the butcher-shop; Felice's jaws; the refusal to eat meat except when he sleeps with Felice in Marienbad. See Michel Cournot's article, "Toi qui as de si grandes dents," Nouvel Observateur, April 17,
 1972. This is one of the most beautiful texts on Kafka. One can find a similar opposition between
eating and speaking in Lewis Carroll, and a comparable escape into non-sense.
      9. Franz Kafka, The Trial, trans. Willa and Edwin Muir (New York: Schocken Books, 1956):
"[H]e noticed that they were talking to him, but he could not make out what they were saying, he
heard nothing but the din that filled the whole place, through which a shrill unchanging note like
that of a siren seemed to sing."
     10. Kafka, Diaries 20 August 1911, 61-62.
    11. Kafka, Diaries: "Without gaining a sense, the phrase 'end of the month' held a terrible secret
for me" especially since it was repeated every month—Kafka himself suggests that if this expression
remained shorn of sense, this was due to laziness and "weakened curiosity." A negative explication
invoking lack or powerlessness, as taken by Wagenbach. It is well-known that Kafka makes this sort
of negative suggestion to present or to hide the objects of his passion.
     12. Kafka, Letters to Milena, 58. Kafka's fascination with proper names, beginning with those
that he invented: see Kafka, Diaries, 11 February 1913 (a propos of the names in The Verdict).
     13. Kafka commentators are at their worst in their interpretations in this respect when they regulate everything through metaphors: thus, Marthe Robert reminds us that the Jews are like dogs or,
to take another example, that "since the artist is treated as someone starving to death Kafka makes
him into a hunger artist; or since he is treated as a parasite, Kafka makes him into an enormous insect"ercle du livre precieux, 5:311). It seems to us that this is a simplistic
conception of the literary machine-Robbe-Grillet has insisted on the destruction of all metaphors
in Kafka.
     14. See, for example, the letter to Pollak in Kafka, February 1902, 1-2.
     15. See H. Vidal Sephiha, "Introduction a 1'etude de 1'intensif," in18 (June 1970):
 104-20. We take the termom J.-F. Lyotard who uses it to indicate the connection of intensity and libido.

                                            94 D NOTES

     16. Sephiha, "Introduction," 107 ("We can imagine that any phrase conveying a negative notion
of pain, evil, fear, violence can cast off the notion in order to retain no more than its limit-value—
that is, its intensive value": for example, the German word sehr, which comes from the Middle High
German word, Ser meaning "painful").
     17. Wagenbach, Franz Kafka, 78-88 (especially 78, 81, 88).
     18. Kafka, Diaries, 15 December 1910, 33.
     19. Henri Gobard, "De la vehicularite de la langue anglaise," Langues modernes (January 1972)
(and L'Alienation linguistique: analyse tetraglossique, [Paris: Flammarion, 1976]).
     20. Michel Foucault insists on the importance of the distribution between what can be said in
a language at a certain moment and what cannot be said (even if it can beeorges Devereux
(cited by H. Gobard) analyzes the case of the young Mohave Indians who speak about sexuality with
great ease in their vernacular language but who are incapable of doing so in that vehicular language
that English constitutes for them; and this is so not only because the English instructor exercises a
repressive function, but also because there is a problem of languages (see Essais d'ethnopsychiatrie
generate [Paris: Gallimard, 1970], 125-26).
     21. On the Prague Circle and its role in linguistics, see Change, No. 3 (1969) and 10 (1972).
(It is true that the Prague circle was only formed in 1925. But in 1920, Jakobson came to Prague
where there was already a Czech movement directed by Mathesius and connected with Anton Marty
who had taught in the German university system. From 1902 to 1905, Kafka followed the courses
given by Marty, a disciple of Brentano, and participated in Brentanoist meetings.)
     22. On Kafka's connections to Lowy and Yiddish theater, see Brod, Franz Kafka, 110-16, and
Wagenbach, Franz Kafka, 163-67. In this mime theater, there must have been many bent heads and
straightened heads.
     23. "An Introductory Talk on the Yiddish Language," trans. Ernst Kaiser and Eithne Wilkins
in Franz Kafka, Dearest Father (New York: Schocken Books, 1954), 381-86.
     24. A magazine editor will declare that Kafka's prose has "the air of the cleanliness of a child
who takes care of himself' (see Wagenbach, Franz Kafka, 82).
     25. "The Great Swimmer" is undoubtedly one of the most Beckett-like of Kafka's texts: "I have
to well admit that I am in my own country and that, in spite of all my efforts, I don't understand
a word of the language that you are speaking."

                    CHAPTER 4. THE COMPONENTS OF EXPRESSION
      1. Kafka, Diaries, 15 December 1910, 33.
      2. Gustave Janouch,143 (and p. 158: "Form is not the expression of the content
but only its power of attraction").
      3. Letter to Brod, Kafka, Letters, 13 July 1912, 80.
      4. We are making use here of an unpublished study by Claire Parnet on The Vampire and Letters where the Kafka-Dracula connection is specifically analyzed. See also all the texts that Elias
Canetti cites inhlice(New York: Schocken Books, 1974); but
in spite of these texts, Canetti doesn't seem to notice this vampirish activity and speaks instead about
Kafka's shame over his body, his humiliation, his distress, and his need for protection.
      5. See the admirable text in Kafka, Letters to Milena, 228-31. Dictating or typing machines
fascinated Kafka in every possible way-bureaucratically, commercially, erotically. Felice worked
in a business that sold "parlographs" and she became the firm's manager. Kafka was seized by a fever
of advice and propositions about ways to get parlographs into hotels, post offices, trains, ships, and
zeppelins and to combine them with typewriters, with "praxinoscopes," with the telephone. Kafka
was obviously enchanted and thought that in this way he could console Felice who wanted to cry:
"I sacrifice my nights to your business. Answer me in detail." Kafka, Letters to Felice, 166-68. With

                                             NOTES D 95

a great commercial and technical elan, Kafka wants to introduce the series of diabolical inventions
into the nice series of beneficial inventions.
      6. Kafka, Letters to Felice, 17 November, 1912, 47.
      7. Kafka, Diaries, 19 January 1911, 43.
      8. "Devilish in my innocence": see Kafka, Diaries, 65. And in "The Judgment," the father says,
"An innocent child, yes, that you were, truly, but still more truly have you been a devilish human
being! —And therefore take note: I sentence you now to death by drowning!"
      9. Proust's letters are above all else topographies of social, psychical, physical and geographic
obstacles; and the obstacles are much larger the closer the correspondent is to them. This is obvious
in the letters to Madame Strauss, which, like the letters to Milena, have a certain Angel of Death
quality to them. In Proust's letters to young men, there are even more topographical obstacles relating to space and time, means, states of the soul, conditions, changes. For example, in a letter to
a young man, where it seems that Proust no longer wants him to come to Cabourg, "You are free
to decide what you want, and if you decide to come, don't write, but telegraph me right away when
you arrive and, if possible take a train that arrives around 6 in the evening, or at least toward the
end of the afternoon or after dinner but not too late and not before two in the afternoon, since I would
like to see you before you've seen anyone. But I'll explain all of that if you come."
     10. On the prison, see Kafka Diaries, 19 January 1911, 43.
     11. Bachelard, Lautreamont (Paris: Editions Corti, 1956); for discussion of pure action, speed,
and attack as characteristics of Lautreamont and the slowness of Kafka understood as a wearing
down of "the will to live," see Bachelard's first chapter.
     12. Kafka often contrasts two types of voyage, an extensive and organized one, and one that is
intense, in pieces, a sinking or fragmentation. This second voyage takes place in a single place, in
"one's bedroom," and is all the more intense for that: "Now you lie against this, now against that
wall, so that the window keeps moving around you . . . I must just take my walks and that must
be sufficient, but in compensation there is no place in all the world where I could not take my walks."
(Kafka, Diaries, 19 July 1910, 27-28.) An intensive America, a map of intensities.
     13. Kafka, Diaries, 9 February 1915, 2:115.
     14. Kafka, Diaries, 8 August 1917, 2:179.
     15. Kafka,Letterelice17 November 1912, 47.
     16. The anger of Kafka when he is treated as a writer of intimacy: hence, from the start of his
letters to Felice, his violent reaction against readers or critics who speak above all else of his interior
life. In France, indeed, the initial success of Kafka was based on this misunderstanding-a Kafka
who is simultaneously intimate and symbolical, allegorical and absurd. This is discussed in Marthe
Robert's excellent study on the conditions of the reading of Kafka in France, "Citoyen de 1'utopie"
in Les Critiques de notre temps et Kafka (Paris:Garnier 1973). We can say that Kafka studies really
began when German and Czech critics noted the importance of his belonging to a strong bureaucracy
(insurance company, social security) and his attraction to the socialist and anarchist movements in
Prague (something he often hid from Max Brod). Wagenbach's two books translated into French,
Kafkapar lui-mem(Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1968) andssential references for all these questions.
     Another aspect is the role of the comic and the joyful in Kafka. But this is the same thing: the
politics of the statement (enonce) and the joy of desire. Even if Kafka is sick or dying, even if he
brandishes guilt as his own private circus, to repel whatever bores him. It is not coincidental that
every interpreter fascinated by neurosis insists simultaneously on a tragic or anguished side of Kafka
and on an apolitical side. Kafka's gaiety, or the gaiety of what he wrote, is no less important than
its political reality and its political scope. The best part of Max Brod's book on Kafka is when Brod
tells how listeners laughed at the reading of the first chapter of The Trial "quite immoderately" (p.
 178). We don't see any other criteria for genius than the following: the politics that runs through

                                            96 D NOTES

it and the joy that it communicates. We will term "low" or "neurotic" any reading that turns genius
into anguish, into tragedy, into a "personal concern." For example, Nietzsche, Kafka, Beckett,
whomever: those who don't read them with many involuntary laughs and political tremors are
deforming everything.
    In these components of Kafka's work—letters, stories, novels —we haven't dealt with two elements: on the one hand, very short texts, somber aphorisms, and relatively pious parables, as in the
breakup with Felice in 1918 when Kafka is really sad, tired, and thus incapable of writing and lacking a desire to write. On the other hand, we haven't dealt with the Diaries for an inverse reason.
Namely, that the Diaries touch upon everything: it is the rhizome itself. It is not an element in the
sense of one aspect of the work, but the element (in the sense of milieu) that Kafka declares he never
wants to leave, just like a fish. This is so because this element communicates with all of the outside
and distributes the desire of the letters, the desire of the stories, the desire of the novels.

                          CHAPTER 5. IMMANENCE AND DESIRE
      1. See Herman Uyttersprot, Eine neue Ordnungder Werke Kafkas? (Antwerp: Vries-Brouwers,
1957).
      2. Kafka, The Trial, 127: "Above all, if he were to achieve anything, it was essential that he
should banish from his mind once and for all the idea of possible guilt. This legal action was nothing
more than a business deal such as he had often concluded to the advantage of the Bank, a deal within
which, as always happened, lurked dangers which must simply be obviated."
      3. Petit-bourgeois intimacy and the absence of any sort of social criticism will be the primary
themes in the opposition of the communists to Kafka. Take the example of the study done by the
weekly journal Action in 1946: "Faut-il bruler Kafka?" [Should we burn Kafka?] Then, things get
even tougher and Kafka will be increasingly denounced as an active antisocialist who engages in a
struggle against the proletariat by means of the portrait that he paints of bureaucracy. Sartre intervened in the Moscow Peace Conference in 1962 to call for a better analysis of the connections between art and politics and of Kakfa in particular. Then followed two colloquia in Liblice in Czechoslavakia (1963 and 1965) dealing with Kafka. The participants saw there signs of a deep change;
and, in fact, there were important presentations by Golsdtucker, Fischer, and Karst. But there were
no Russian participants, and the presentations had little resonance in the socialist literary press. The
East German press was the only one to talk about it, but only to denounce it. These conferences
and the influence of Kafka were then attacked as one of the causes of the spring revolts in Prague.
Golsdtucker declared that "we have been accused, Ernst Fischer and myself, of having wanted to
eliminate Goethe's Faust, symbol of the working class, from the spirit of socialists in order to replace
him by Kafka's sad hero, Gregor Samsa, man metamorphosed into a bug." Golsdtucker had to emigrate to England, and Karst to America. On all these points, on the respective position of the different Eastern governments, and on Karst and Golsdtucker's recent statements, see the excellent article
by Antonin Liehm, "Kafka dix ans apres," Les Temps modemes (July 1973).
      4. Kafka, The Trial, 40: "You may object that it is not a trial at all; you are quite right, for
it is only a trial if I recognize it as such."
      5. It seems to us to be completely wrong to define the unlimited delay as a state of "trouble,"
"indecision," "guilty conscience."

                         CHAPTER 6. PROLIFERATION OF SERIES
     1. The two cases often show up in Kafka: the two that make the same movement together—for
example, the appearance of Arthur and Jeremy in the first chapter ohe immobile double who sends his double to move around; see the theme of "The Man Who Disappeared," "The Judgment," and, in The Castle, Sortini and Sordini ("[Sordini] exploits the resemblance in name to push
things on Sortini's shoulders, especially any duties falling on him as a deputy, so that he can be left

                                             NOTES D 97

undisturbed to his work"). It seems that the first case is only a preparation for the second: even Arthur and Jeremy separate, Arthur returning to the Castle while Jeremy moves around the town and
loses his youthfulness. On the bureaucratic quality of the double, see one of Dostoevsky's masterpieces, The Double.
      2. Kafka, Diaries, 27 August, 1916, 2:164
      3. Michel Foucault has provided an analysis of power that reworks all economic and political
questions. Although his method is completely different, his analysis is not without a certain Kafkaesque resonance. Foucault insists on the segmentarity of power, its contiguity, its immanence in
the social field (which means that it is not an interiority of a soul or of a subject along the lines of
a superego). He shows that power doesn't work at all by the classic alternative of violence or ideology, persuasion or constraint. See Foucault's Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan (New
York: Pantheon, 1977): the field of immanence and the multiplicity of power in "disciplinary societies."
      4. Cited in Wagenbach, Franz Kafka, 169.
      5. Gustave Janouch, Conversations, 174. And for the preceding citations, pp. 102-103, Janouch
tells how, one day, under the entrance to the Worker's Insurance offices, Kafka lowered his head,
seemed to tremble, and "vigorously crossed himself with a great Roman cross" (p. 102).
      6. Janouch,143.
      7. Ibid., 45: "You say far more about the impressions which things inspire in you than about
the things and objects themselves. That is lyrical poetry. You caress the world, instead of grasping
it."
      8. Similarly, in The Castle, Barnabas, comparing "the many portraits that have been done of
Klamm," and his supposed appearances, sees differences that are all the more disconcerting in that
they are absolutely minimal and indescribable.

                                CHAPTER 7. THE CONNECTORS
      1. Kafka, Diaries, 21 July 1913, 292-93.
      2. Kafk9 July 1914, 2:71.
      3. Kafka, The Castle, trans. Willa and Edwin Muir (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1962), 54
(the scene with Frieda).
      4. Class struggle already permeates the family and the store at the level of the maids and the
employees. This is one of the central themes of Kafka's "The Letter to His Father" (New York:
Schocken Books, 1966). One of Kafka's sisters was reproached about her attraction to maids and
to country life. The first time that Kafka saw Felice, she had "a bare throat," "an almost broken
nose," "a face that wore its emptiness openly," large teeth; he takes her to be a maid (Kafka, Diaries,
20 August 1912, 268-69). But also, to be a sister, and a whore. She isn't: like Kafka himself, she
is already an important bureaucrat and will end up as a company director. Nonetheless, Kafka will
gain secret pleasures from her as a kind of adjustment of the bureaucratic gears or segments.
      5. See Max Brod, "Postface to The Castle"; Wagenbach, Kafka par lui-meme, 102-3.
      6. One of the models for the artist, or for Titorelli, has to be Oskar Pollak, one of the most
mysterious of Kafka's childhood friends. Kafka undoubtedly felt a great love for him, but Pollak
quickly got out of it and died at an early age in 1915. He wasn't a painter but a specialist in the Italian
Baroque. He had a remarkable competence in a large number of areas that must have intrigued
Kafka: architecture, urban cartography, old administrative and commercial books; see Max Brod,
Franz Kafka, 54-59.
      7. Kafka, "The Substitute": "As to the way in which the exclamation and the song were connected, almost all the witnesses had a different opinion, the accuser even pretended that it wasn't
the accused but someone else who had sung."
      8. Titorelli "was no more questionable as an ally than the lawyer."

                                            98 D NOTES

     9. Michel Carrouges uses the term bachelor machines to designate a certain number of fantastic
machines described in literature: among them, that of "The Penal Colony." However, we don't accept his interpretation of Kafka's machines (especially in relation to "the law"). The following passages come from a project of Kafka's for a short story on the theme of the bachelor. See Kafka, Diaries, 19 July 1910, 22-29.

                       CHAPTER 8. BLOCKS, SERIES, INTENSITIES

      1. Maurice Blanchot, who has so well analyzed fragmentary writing, is equally adept at noting
the force of the continuous in Kafka (even if he interprets it in a negative way and within the theme
of the "lack"): see Blanchot, L'Amitie (Paris: Gallimard, 1971), 316-319.
      2. See Max Bro51 (Brod reproduces here a "life program" that Kafka drew
up for himself).
      3. Kafka, Diaries, 8 October 1917, 2:189.
      4. Kafka, "Description of a Struggle," in Complete Stories, 15.
      5. Kafka writes a letter to his sister Elly that is a sort of counterpart to "The Letter to His Father". (Compare Kafka, Letters, 294-97.) Referring to Swift, Kafka opposes the familial animal and
the human animal. As a familial animal, the child is caught up in a system of power where the parents
"arrogate to themselves the sole right . . . to represent the family." This whole family system consists of the two coexisting poles: lowering one's head and raising one's head ("slavery and tyranny").
The spontaneous life of the child as a human animal lies elsewhere, in a certain deterritorialization.
Thus, he must quickly try to leave his familial milieu, as Kafka wanted his nephew Felix to do. Unless the child comes from a poor family in which case "their working-life cannot be kept at a distance
from their hut" (there is no being thrown back onto an individual situation; the child is immediately
connected to an extraparental social field). But if the child isn't poor, the best thing to do is leave
even if the child "returns to his native village, [recognized by no one]. This is the true nature of
mother love." This is because the childhood block functioned through the mother.
      6. Once again, we should compare him to Proust, who also makes ample use of the two poles
of mannerism: worldly mannerism as an art of the faraway, an exaggeration of the phantomobstacle, and the childhood mannerism as an art of the contiguous (not only are the famous involuntary memories real childhood blocks, but so is the uncertainty of the narrator's age at various points
in the text). In other arrangements, the two mannerisms also operate in the work of Holderlin or
Kleist.

                         CHAPTER 9. WHAT IS AN ASSEMBLAGE?

     1. See Brod, Franz Kafka, 82.
     2. Wagenbach, Kafka par lui-meme, 82-85. (Wagenbach cites a detailed report by Kafka on
the utility of cylindrical spindles in planing-machines).

Index

This page intentionally left blank

Index

Aestheticsegel), xvii                                     "The Metamorphosis," 15; in the novel,
Allegory, xviii                                           38. See also Deterritorialization; Line of
America, 12, 41                                           escape
Amerika, 31, 50; assemblage in, 81-83;                 Benjamin, Walter, ix-xxi
    deterritorialization in, 65; proliferation in,     Blocks, 72-80
    55; socialist and anarchist movements in,          Brod, Max, 9, 19, 68; on arrangement of The
    57; topography in, 73                                 Trial, 44, 49
Anarchism. See Amerika                                 "Bucket Rider, The," 37
Antilyricism, 60, 70                                   Bureaucracy, 56, 75; Soviet, 58. See also
Anti-Oedipus (Deleuze and Guattari), xxii,                Desert; Eros; Hapsburg; Proliferation
    xxvi                                               Burrow. See Rhizome
Antiphilosophy, 27                                     "Burrow, The," 37
Anti-Semitism, 58
Archaism, 75-76                                        Capitalism, 83.Eros
Assemblage (Agencement), xi, xxvii, 53, 56,            "Cares of a Family Man, The," 40
    81-88; collective, 22, 65; dismantling of,         Castle, The, 3, 21, 33, 46-53 passim; 60,
    46, 59; index of, 57; of justice, 52;                 63-68 passim, assemblage in, 81; blocks
    machinic, 37, 45, 47; and the novel, 48,              in, 79; proliferation in, 55; series in, 85;
    81; replaces subject, 18. See also Amer-              topography in, 73-74
    ikaLetters                                         Celine, Louis Ferdinand, 26
Avant-garde, 75                                        Child, 79, 98 n5. See also Reterritorialization
                                                       Connectors, 63-71; as aesthetic impressions,
Balzac, Honoré de, 55                                     69; in The Castle, 67; disjunction beBarthes, Roland, xii                                      tween,20; in The Trial, 67
Becoming-animal, 36, 46, 51, 59; defeat of,            Consciousness, 16-17
   87; defined, 13; and deterritorialization,          Content, 3-8.Expression
    14; as immobile voyage, 35, 95, n12; in            Continuum. See Process

                                                     101

                                          102 D INDEX

Correspondence. See Letters                      Flight, 13. See also Line of escape
"Country Doctor, A," 64-65                       Form: as bent-straightened head, xxiv, 28,
Criticism, 46. See alsoNegation                      59, 78, 86; of content and expression, 5,
Culpability, xix                                     61; diagram, 5. See also Sound
                                                 Foucault, Michel, 94 n20, 97 n3
De Certeau, Michel, ix                           Freud, Sigmund, xv, 79. See also Psycho-
"Description of a Struggle," 5, 31, 64               analysis
Desert, 13, 18, 26, 59; bureaucracy as, 56;
   in "The Jackals and the Arabs," 35            Gaya Scienza (Joyful Science) (Nietzsche),
Desire, xiv, xx, 4, 8, 10; deterritorialized,       xix, xxviii
   52; immanence and, 43-52; and justice,        Gemüt, 46
   64; and law, xix; and machine, 82; poli-      Genre, 38-40, 64. See also Literature, minor
   ,57;evo-                                      German, 19-20, 23, 58; as a deterritorialized
   lutionary,57; states of, 5, 28. See also         language, 17; as a "paper language," xvi,
   Trial, The                                       16; in Prague, 22, 26, 58. See also Line
Deterritorialization, 15, 20, 35, 68, 86; as        of escape; Prague, school; Yiddish
   becoming-animal, 13; and German lan-          Gesture, xii, xviii, xx
   9;                                            Gobard, Henri: his tetralinguistic model, 23
   and machines, 58; and minor literature,       Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, xiv, 18, 29
    16; of the mouth, 19; in "Report to an       "Great Wall of China, The," 43-53 passim,
   Academy," 14; of representation, 24; and         72, 73, 77, 83
   reterritorialization, 61. See also Desire;    Guilt, xix, 9, 32, 52; in Kafka and Proust,
   Einstein, Albert; Hapsburg; Reterritoriali-      34; and law, 44. See also Rhizome
   zation;Sound
Dialogues (Deleuze and Parnet), xv, xvi, xx      Hapsburg, 24, 50, 58, 66
Dickens, Charles, 55; as model for Amerika,      Hegel, G. W. F., xiv, 50
   77-78                                         Homosexuals, 68-69, 79
Discontinuity.locks                              "Hunger Artist, The," 20
Dismantling (Démontage), 55; of guilt in The
    Trial, 45, 96 n2; as method, 48              Imitation, 14
"Dream, A," 44, 62                               Immanence, 55. See also Desire
Doubling, 53, 83, 85, 96 nl; of subject, 31      Incest, 5, 66-69, 79. See also Deterritoriali-
                                                     zation; "Metamorphosis, The"
Ecriture de I`histoire(de Certeau), ix           Innocence, 33
Einstein, Albert, xv, 24                         Intensities, 72-81
Enunciation (Énonciation), xii, xix, xxviii,     Intensives. See Tensors
   85. See also Desire; Subject                  Interpretation, ix, 43, 45
Epistolary formLetters                           "Investigations of a Dog," 5, 14, 36
Eros, 38, 57, 64
Escape, line of. See Line of escape              "Jackals and the Arabs, The," 35
Expression, xvii, 3-8, 16; components of,        Jesenska, Milena, 21, 30, 57, 94 n5
   28-42; machine, 28-32.See also                "Josephine the Singer, or the Mouse Folk," 5
   Machine; Procedure.                           "Judgement, The," 34, 36, 37
                                                 Justice, xx. See also Assemblage, machinic;
Fascism, 12, 41, 83. See also Eros                   Desire
Father, xi, 12.Desire; Triangle,
   familial                                      Kant, Immanuel, 43, 49
Faustian pact, 29, 31, 32. See also Proust,      Kleist, Heinrich von, 55
   Marcel
Flaubert, Gustave, xiv, 55                       Lang, Fritz, xv, 24, 76

                                           INDEX03

Language, 16, 19, 21, 25; asignifying, 22; as       Montaigne, Michel de, xii
    destratification, xvi; French, 23; servants',   Music, 5-6. See also Sound
    26. See also Desert; German                     Myth, xi, 23
Laughter, 41-42
Law, xiv, 43-45, 49-52, 59; defined, xix; a         Negation, xiii. See also Criticism
    paranoid, 72-73; schizo-, 73; transcen-         Neurosisedipus
    7. See also Guilt; Kant,                        Nihilism, xiii
    Immanuel                                        Novel, 38, 83. See also Assemblage; Line of
"Letter to the Father," 9-15 passim, 32                escape
Letters, 30-34, 36, 84; to Felice, 31, 94 n5;
    Kafka's and Proust's, 33. See also Rhi-         Obliques, 1
    zomeubject                                      Oedipus, xiii, 9-15, 45
Line of escape, xxvii, 6, 21, 34-36                 Operation (Procédé), 78
    51; animal essence as, and becoming-
    animal, 12; components of, 65; as dis-          "Penal Colony, The", 8, 39, 43, 60
    mantling,59; and extremity, 76; and Ger-        Philosophy. See Antiphilosophy
    manlaproliferation,55;                          Photo, 3, 51, 61, 78; as map, 9, 11; and
    in the stories, 46                                  Oedipal incest, 67. See also Portrait; ProLiterature, xvii, 46, 83; characteristics of, 18;       liferation
    conditions of, 85, 88; defined, 16; major,      Plato, xvii
    41; minor, xiv-xvi, 16-28, 65, 71; and          Polylingualism, 26
    use of tensors, 22-23. See also Deterri-        Portrait, 3. See also Photo
    torialization;Intensives                        Prague: circle, xv, 25, 38, 70; and German,
                                                        19; school, 79
Machine, xv, 98 n9; abstract, 47, 85; and           Procedure (Procedure), 78
   collective enunciation, 18; defined, x;          Process, 51
   experimental, xi; of expression, xvii; a         Proliferation, 53, 55; as method, 58; of
   Kafka-, 7; letter as, 34; literary, 18,              photos, 62; of segmentalization, 88; of
   58-59; nature of, 70; writing as, xi, 32,            series, 53-62. See also Castle, The; Line
   34, 40, 45, 60, 82                                   of escape; Triangle
"Man Who Disappeared, The," 31                      Proust, Marcel, 26, 33, 65, 95 n9; his pact
Mannerism, 98 n6; in The Castle and The                 with the devil, 33. See also Letters
   Trial, 79-80. See also Sobriety                  Psychoanalysis, 10, 25, 27, 66.See also
Map, 36; Proust's letters as a, 34Se                    Freud, Sigmund; Interpretation
   Topography
Margins, 17                                         "Report to an Academy, A," 6, 14
Masochism, 66                                       Republic(Plato), xvii
Melville, Herman, 36                                Reterritorialization, 13, 24; of childhood,
"Memoirs of the Kalda Railroad," 37, 69, 87            78-79; and Zionism, 92 n6. See also
Memory, 4                                              Deterritorialization
"Metamorphosis, The," xvi, 14, 34, 39, 47,          Rhizome, xii, xxvi, 3, 39, 41, 96 n16; and
   64; becoming-animal in, 87; familial tri-           guilt, 33; as intensities, 13; letters as a,
   angma t h e                                         29
   Oedipal and schizo-incest in, 67; the por-       Robert, Marthe, xxvi, 48, 92 n5, 93 n13, 95
   traitn                                              n16
   a
Metaphor, xviii, 22, 36                             Russia, 12; revolutionary, 58, 75
Method (Procédé). See Dismantling
Meyrink, Gustav, 19                                 Sacher-Masoch, Alexander von, xxiv, xxv,
PlateauxDeleuze and Guattari), xvi,                     66. See also Masochism
   xxiii                                            Sartre, Jean-Paul, xxiii, 96 n3

                                         104INDEX

Segment, 56, 84; hard, x. See also Trial, The        63-68acquittal in, 72; familial
Sephiha, Vidal, 22                                    triangle in, 54; film of, 76; law and desire
Sense, 21                                             in, 50; mannerism in, 79-80; photos, 4;
Series, 72-81; proliferation of, 53-63. See           retriangulation in, 88; segment in, 84;
    also Blocks; Proliferation                        series in, 85; topography in, 73.ee also
"Should We Burn Kafka?," xxviii, 47, 96 n3            Brod, Max; Uyttersprot, Herman
Signification, 3, 7, 22; orders of, xi-xii. See   Triangle; familial, 11-14; bureaucratic, 14.
    also Sound Sisters, 65                            See also "Metamorphosis, The"; ProliferaSobriety, 25, 58; mannerism of, 79; as                tion;Trial, The
    method, 19
Socialism, 57. See also Amerika                   Uyttersprot, Herman, 44
Sound, 4-628, 51, 65; and deterri-
    torialization, 21                             Vampirism, 29-30, 32; fear of, 46; in Proust,
Stalinism, 41, 83                                    34, 94 n4
Statement (Énoncé), 82, 95 n16                    Vection, xii, xvii, 28
Stories, 34-37, 54.Machine                        "Verdict, The," 31, 73
Subject, ix, 18, 31, 53, 83; categories of, 18;
    of enunciation and of statement, 20; in the   Wagenbach, Klaus, 23, 68
    letters, 30-31. See also Doubling; Series     "Wedding Preparations," 31
                                                  Wegener, Paul, xv, 24
Tel Quel, xxiii                                   Welles, Orson, 76
"Temptation in the Village," 15                   Whores, 65
Tensors, 22-23                                    Wiene, Robert, xv, 24
Thanatos, 36, 59                                  Worterflucht, 26
Theology, xviii                                   Writing, 41, 47
Third International, 75
Topography, 31-32, 73-75. See alsoCastle,         Yiddish, 25
    The',Maps
Totalities, 85                                    Zionism, 19, 92 n6. See also ReterritorializaTrial (Proces), See Assemblage                    tion
Trial, The, 5, 11, 40, 43-53 pasim, 57,

Gilles Deleuzrofessofphilosophnivincennes).
Among his many books are studies of Kant, Spinoza, and Nietzsche. Some recent translations from Minnesota include:riticaPhilosophy(1985) and
Cinema 1: Movement-Image (1986). Forthcoming from Minnesota is Cinema 2:
Time-Image.

Felix GuattarisychoanalystatheLaBordeclinic
Gilles Deleuze of Anti-Oedipus (Minnesota paperback, 1983) and A Thousand
Plateaus, forthcoming from Minnesota.

Dana Polan is associate professor of film and English at the University of Pittsburgh, and author of Power and Paranoia: History, Narrative, and the American Cinema, 1940-1950(Columbia, 1986).

Reda Bensmai'ateacFrenchliteratur
Minnesota, and is author of The Barthes Effect, forthcoming from Minnesota.