1

Gilles Deleuze
Seminar On Cinema: The Movement-Image
Lecture 15, 20 April 1982
Transcribed by: Girard Yann (Part 1) and unknown contributor (Part 2); additional revisions
to transcription and time stamping: Charles J. Stivale
Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1
… So, what I want to do today – and it will be for the last time – is to make a comparison beginning
from two examples that at first glance might appear difficult. First example, I would say, well, what
is the degradation of a character in cinema? Why is this of interest to me? Because it's very... it's
curious the way a particular art represents decomposition or degradation. It's not a cheerful subject.
Which doesn't at all mean that I'm pessimistic, simply that these are phenomena that can occur.
Here I would like to make a test of the difference between expressionism, naturalism and realism, at
the level of this notion of degradation, and more specifically... at the level of the degradation of a
character.
And then, the second key example: I would like to consider a problem that I've barely touched
upon, even when I was speaking about the close-up – or, rather, I only touched upon it very
furtively but from now on we will have to consider it more and more, which is the problem of the
actor and acting. So, I would like to ask myself: How does an expressionist actor act? How does a
naturalist actor act? How does a realist actor act? It goes without saying that this is not an
exhaustive list of the different styles of acting. There is no exhaustive list of styles of acting, and
besides, I can't even say that these three cases are particularly interesting. It seems to me that what
is interesting in the actor's style of acting or in the problems pertaining to the actor are things that
we will only be able to grasp later, which is probably to say never, since by then the year will be
over… or maybe not, maybe we'll manage to grasp them next time.
Regarding degradation, very quickly I would ask: how do you recognize expressionist degradation?
It's like the history of a painting, how do you recognize it? What is expressionist degradation? I
would have to say, actually, oh, I don't know; it's not really degradation. What it is – and I've
already touched upon this, but I'm placing it here because I want to... it's a kind of fall. The great
expressionist directors have represented the degradation of their characters in the form of a fall, but
a fall into what? A fall into a more and more intense darkness, as though the character were
attracted, sucked in, by a kind of black hole.
A fall… well, this fall, how is it achieved? It is achieved in particular by something that also
concerns the actor's style, the famous use of the diagonal. The body is inscribed in the expressionist
actor, as one of the things that the expressionist actor was able to introduce not only in theater but
fully in cinema, probably even more in cinema than in theater: to inhabit the diagonal with their
whole body, whether it be the backward-leaning diagonal of Nosferatu 1 who dies... who dies in the
early morning, or the forward-leaning diagonal of the The Last Laugh 2 at the moment of the man's
despair, a kind of very subtle, very beautiful use of the diagonal, because as they say: "the diagonal
is the true line of intensity". But intensity of what? Intensity of the fall.
So, in the end, it's not degradation that we have in expressionism, it will only become degradation
when what happens? Only when expressionism leaves these any-spaces-whatever, these dark,
smoky spaces, in order to attain a certain social realism. At that moment, it will retain all sorts of
expressionist coordinates and determinations but will have them play out in a determined spacetime, in a determined milieu. At that point the expressionist fall will be able to assume the outward
aspect of a degradation, and this will be the case of Pabst's Pandora's Box, 3 or Murnau's The Last

                                                                                                          2

Laugh, which are the great expressionist degradations. To the point that, if you like – here I'll be
quite brief – if you remember the opposition I had established between what I called Sternberg's
lyrical abstraction and expressionism, an opposition that was really quite violent... the objection you
surely had in mind, but which you were kind enough not to make, is the case of The Blue Angel 4,
which seems to be almost an expressionist film, and which in fact recounts the story of a long
process of degradation.
Now I would say that in The Blue Angel – I'll just say this very quickly because it's a question of a
small detail – with The Blue Angel, Sternberg in fact finds himself completely unable to make an
expressionist film, because in my view, that's not at all what it is, but instead he mimics or competes
with a kind of expressionism, competes using his own means, namely through the adventure of light
and no longer that of chiaroscuro. To compete with expressionism precisely because expressionism,
for its part, emerged from smoky any-spaces-whatever, and here we can compare this with the
degradation of the professor in The Blue Angel – one that concerns all professors – the degradation
of the poor professor we have in The Blue Angel is typically presented as a fall into a hole, into a
black hole. This would be expressionist degradation.
Naturalist degradation is a quite different matter. If you take Stroheim's great degradations, the
famous degradation in Greed 5 or the degradation of Foolish Wives 6 which in a sense seems to me
even more interesting because more subtle... One could say that the degradation of the hero of
Foolish Wives is more significant than that of the couple in Greed, though it is a very different type
of degradation. I remind you very briefly of the formula – I don't want to go back over these
analyses but on this occasion what we have is the slope of the impulse, which is very different from
the idea... Here I would say that these are like metaphors to guide us... It's not at all... it's no longer
a question of falling into a black hole; it's no longer the ship that sinks, this diagonal position that
expresses something like a sinking ship, that drowns, that is sucked down, that's not what it is. It is,
rather, the declination, the steepest slope of the impulse. This is what we saw when we analyzed
naturalism: this phenomenon of the entropy of the originary world, the entropy of the originary
world where the impulse follows a slope, an irresistible slope that will lead the hero of Foolish
Wives from the seduction of a worldly woman, for example, to the attempted rape of the mentally
disabled girl, and finally to his own death and his corpse being thrown in the rubbish tip, all this
constituting the slope of the impulse. Each time, it will tear off a piece, because the impulse is an
odd thing, since it is double. This is the horror of the impulse and of the cinema of impulse.
The horror of the impulse is that, each time, how can I put it... it takes what it finds, and at the same
time... it only takes what it finds, and at the same time, it chooses a piece. It takes what it finds, and
it chooses a piece, these are like the two contradictory tensions of the impulse: whatever I find, I'll
be satisfied with. Ah yes! But whatever I'm satisfied with, I'll elect a piece, I'll tear off a piece,
which will be mine! Impulse is a terrible thing. So that's what constitutes this kind of degradation
because I'll find things that are lower and lower, I'll have to scrape lower and lower. That would
be... that would be the irresistible slope, and I'll take pieces that are more and more rotten, a kind of
ever-steepening slope. It seems to me that naturalist degradation... is very, very different both
conceptually and visually, in terms of its images... it's very, very different from expressionist
degradation.
And finally, what would American degradation be? Well, you can easily sense that Americans... no,
no, for them expressionist degradation or naturalistic degradation would be things that in the end
they wouldn't be able to comprehend. Actually, they would understand them since they are
extremely cultivated, but it's not their thing. They would say that these are all European concerns,
so it's no wonder that Stroheim... [Interruption of the recording] [11:00]
... a large part of whom are alcoholics. Indeed, the manifestation of American-style degradation, I
would say is in realist degradation; it's realist degradation, and this would be a third formula. So,
what would be fun would be... You see how inexhaustible all this is, we have to go quickly because
we could expand on it... my three degradations aren't the whole story, there are obviously many

                                                                                                        3

others. There are symbolist degradations, there are degradations... and then, perhaps the most
beautiful, but we'll look at that later, nothing is exhaustive in what I'm saying. You yourselves can
expand upon these attempts at classification.
So, to understand realist degradation, I would say yes, there is one great manifesto of Americanstyle realist degradation, and it's Fitzgerald, Fitzgerald's famous short story "The Crack-Up".7 And
you remember how the "The Crack-Up" begins with the phrase: "Of course all life is a process of
breaking down". So, I would say, of course Fitzgerald's story is a text of universal beauty, but at the
same time, I would say it's a great American text. And what a pity it is that Fitzgerald never
managed to encounter a great filmmaker, since the American films based on Fitzgerald's work are
really not very good, but never mind.
Because the films of American degradation that would echo Fitzgerald are certainly not to be found
in the Fitzgerald adaptations. So, what are they? I suppose, they can't be considered major films.
But we have the alcoholic degradation of Billy Wilder's Lost Weekend, 8 or the degradation in Miloš
Forman's One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. 9 And that reminds me of something that interests me
greatly. Miloš Forman 10, do you see why? Those who make the finest American films – and we'll
see why this is, it makes for some quite simple and pleasant research – why are they all recent
immigrants? Why is the best American cinema that made by Elia Kazan 11 and all of Kazan's
successors? Why is it they who launched... why do they constitute American cinema's true realism?
Maybe it's because they are the ones who make the law of the American dream.
So, what is this degradation, this American-style degradation? It's the SAS' type of degradation, the
S' being much worse than before, or even nothingness, there being nothing left. It's that this is what
traverses American cinema. Generally speaking, regarding degradation – I could have spoken
instead about salvation, and in that case, I could have spoken about expressionist salvation or
naturalist salvation, but that would have been less fun, so – because in American cinema, you
always have these guys, the guys who crack, but who do so in an American way. They don't crack
the way we do; it's not the same. It's not the degradation of the impulse, and it's not the
degradation... so how do they crack? They're too tired, they've done too much, but in what sense? In
raising and sustaining the required habitus, and there you have it, they can no longer find a reason
to go on, they can't take it anymore. They're tired, tired, so tired of it all! It's no longer worth it.
They won't keep up the habitus anymore. Never mind. Or else there are other possibilities – but
we'll keep these other possibilities... No, no, they did everything, they did everything they could.
They did what they could… So, yes, they are unworthy of America. They are unworthy of America,
but America was asking too much. America told them: whatever the situation, you will find the
habitus, and you will become a millionaire, and then you will no longer be a millionaire, and you
will climb the ladder and you will slip down the ladder and so on. And then there comes a day when
they can't take it anymore, they stay on the same rung of the ladder. They say: leave me alone, leave
me alone, leave me alone, well, alone with a little whiskey, and there you have it. What does this
mean?
When Fitzgerald writes this wonderful manifesto under the title "The Crack-Up," what is he saying?
How does he paint this state of degradation? The way he paints this degradation is as follows: the
situation changes, it never stops changing. There are perpetual changes in the situation. He isolates
a change that concerns him, the rise of the cinema... a change: I didn't ask myself what literature
was; I wrote, it was my business, and then the movies arrived, then I had to take on new habits.
What are the new habits that he had to adopt? To become a screenwriter? He tried it... okay, well, he
was treated like a dog by the producer, by the producers. This was the adventure of many writers
including Faulkner. They all went through it, it's the American way; something changes the
situation, and you look for the right habitus, you look for the answer, the right answer to the
situation. But all this is very tiring, and while these great upheavals in situations take place, there is
a subterranean process, Fitzgerald tells us, that is much more imperceptible. It's the thousand little
cracks, a thousand little cracks, micro-cracks that wear us down. And there is a moment when all

                                                                                                          4

these cracks add up, when the cracks add up, well at that moment you have a crack-up. You can't
take it anymore; you know that you're no longer capable of raising a new habitus. This is the kind of
spiral of realist degradation, when you can no longer raise a new habitus.
So, what remains? What are we left with? We're left with two American solutions, the two
American solutions to degradation. I exclude the third; the third would be to go back up the slope,
which would be salvation. American films, American realist cinema is very fond of showing us the
process of degradation, even in Westerns. You see how the Western has presented us with some very
fine processes of degradation: the old sheriff turned alcoholic, one of finest figures of degradation in
the Western is in Hawks' Rio Bravo 12 there is the former deputy who's now a drunk, and who in the
depths of his degradation, barred from the saloon, is forced to kneel before a spittoon in order to
drink his dose of whiskey. But in Fitzgerald too you have images of this type. However, you see
how the Americans don't like their people falling into despair, and usually the hero manages to
climb back up the slope. Even in The Lost Weekend, alas, he will be saved though he shouldn't have
been. It's not right that the alcoholic at the bottom of his great spiral of degradation is nonetheless
saved.
But I would say that if we exclude this solution, which is only one of the many possibilities, if we
exclude this solution, what's left? Well, I would say that it's game over. In Forman's film, which is a
kind of western set in a psychiatric clinic you have the everyday degradation of the Indian chief. It
is even the most interesting thing about the film: there is the double degradation of the Indian chief
and the white man, who will manage to escape it... the white man will escape through death and it's
the Indian chief who will kill him out of pity. Well, there is a kind of spiral of a very powerful
degradation, which is precisely what makes the film interesting. But this American-style
degradation is only interesting precisely because it's not one particular situation that renders you
incapable. It's the continual evolution, the perpetual changes in the coordinates of the situation, that
is to say the spiral that increasingly wears you down, that introduces micro-cracks in you – I say
this because it will be very important for the realist actor's mode of acting – that it introduces microcracks in you. You understand who I'm referring to, obviously it’s the type of actors who emerged
from the Actors Studio 13. You have the introduction of a whole set of micro-cracks, and it is from
the accumulation of these micro-cracks that eventually you will have a sudden degradation: "Oh no,
I can't take it anymore. I give up!"
Or if it's not a renunciation that leads to death, what will it be? It will be what Fitzgerald called the
only way out: a real act of rupture, a real act of rupture, when finally nothing matters any longer,
nothing matters any longer, and this is different from the other form: to become like everyone else
again, to lose everything, beginning with one's own self-respect, losing self-respect, becoming like
everyone else again. And, as Fitzgerald says, ending his text in such a beautiful and moving way,
"and if you throw me a bone with enough meat on it, I may even lick your hand." 14 To become like
everyone else again, and that's what is to make a break, to make the big break, "to become like
everyone else again," or to embark on an attempt, to embark on a kind of "act for nothing" with no
way out, except to survive, survive.
And, once again, I take some examples from the Western, the Western or what is precisely called
the Neo-Western – we'll see if it's right to make these distinctions – presents us all the time with an
aging, tired cowboy who can't take it any more... he can't take it any more, it's all over with, "Oh,
the law of the west, yes, okay, that was back in the old days", but he no longer believes in it, he
doesn't want anything to do with it, he's too tired, leave him be. And what if we don't leave him be?
Well, I'll show you what I'll do to survive. See, you either leave me alone with my whiskey, or if
you bother me again... In any case I've lost, I've lost, but I'll behave like everyone else, I'll lick the
bone if you want; I know I've lost, but I keep going.
And one of the most important directors of the Neo-Western is, I think, Peckinpah.15 He's the one
who's pushed furthest this question of degradation, not only in all his films, but in his television
series, notably in a great series called The Losers16 where there's... where he describes his hero, his

                                                                                                        5

type of hero, in fact he gives us the formula for this American-style degradation. “They have no
façade, they have not a single illusion left: thus, they represent disinterested adventure” – that's it,
the rupture, a disinterested adventure; you either drown in alcohol or you embark on an adventure
of pure survival: “thus they represent disinterested adventure, from which no advantage is to be
gained except the pure satisfaction of remaining alive.” It's a beautiful phrase, that “except the pure
satisfaction of remaining alive.” 17 So, this is the formula of realist degradation. You see how it is
completely different from Expressionist or Naturalist degradation.
And so, I'll continue on from here. Let's move on to a second question: how could we define the
style of the SAS-type realist actor, in the SAS or SAS' form in contrast with the actor? Oh sorry, I
want to add something here... let me make a quick parenthesis... I'm so far from having exhausted
all the possible forms of degradation that even, and above all from the point of view of cinema...
just think for a minute, what else could we say about this subject? I haven't even started, because
where would one put a school of great filmmakers who were able to discover another type of
degradation that is neither the fall, nor the slope, nor the micro-crack, which is to say the loss of
habitus? Meaning – and you can see right away who I'm thinking of – there would a whole cinema
of degradation, though not just degradation, but where degradation would be a fundamental theme,
where degradation is simply and solely time.
But this time-degradation constitutes another figure entirely, and so you will understand why I
move so slowly towards it. We don't yet have the means to be able to deal with it right now. We
won't have the means to deal with this other type of degradation until we get to the time-image, but
for the moment, we're still floundering within the movement-image. When we come to approach the
time-image – if it happens to us one day – when we come to approach the time-image, then we will
once again meet some great directors, but who come up against a type of degradation that has
nothing to do with these three: a degradation, what should we call it? Should we call it idealist
because it is the degradation of time itself, by time, the time-degradation? Or should we find
another name for it? Perhaps we'll have to find it, we'll find it in the future.
But who do we immediately think of in this case? Of Visconti, of Visconti, and as I said before
Visconti was attempting to confront, or to attain – because it amused him in some way, or it
interested him for a while, especially just after the war – he was trying to confront the phenomenon
of impulses. Except that Visconti, once again, was so aristocratic that he could never approach the
reality of impulses, which would require a vulgarity, a genius vulgarity like that of Stroheim or even
Buñuel. Visconti couldn't do this, he couldn't because his concerns lay elsewhere. What degrades,
what decomposes for Visconti, are not impulses; it is time and nothing but time, and it is the very
existence of time that already constitutes a degradation that always contains its counterpart, which
is salvation. But then what is salvation? Salvation is also time, and it's no wonder that until the end
of his life, he imagined staging – and undoubtedly, he was one of the only two filmmakers who
could do so, La Recherche du temps perdu – which is to say, degradation.
There is indeed a degradation, there are also local phenomena of impulse-type degradation in
Proust. Charlus, for instance, provides us with a fantastic example of degradation of the impulsetype, where we have the slope of the impulse, where he chooses less and less, and tears off
increasingly rotten chunks. In La Recherche du temps perdu, Charlus is, I think, a naturalist
character, he is the novel's great naturalist character. But taken as a whole, La Recherche du temps
perdu is not really concerned with this... the whole of La Recherche du temps perdu shows one of
the aspects of time – and this would trigger a whole analysis of the time-image – it shows one of the
aspects of time as being degradation in itself. Time in the form of time as degradation. As such it
constitutes a process of degradation, and this, I believe, is what Visconti lived through in all of his
cinema. Why is this? Because there is a structure of time that it would be necessary for us to
analyze quite profoundly – unfortunately this is not yet our object - there is a structure, it is by
virtue of time's very structure, it is by virtue of the structure of time that something is necessarily
given to us when it is too late.

                                                                                                             6

So, the problem of time in Visconti's work would be... one part of the problem of time in Visconti's
cinema would be the following question. Why is this and what is this time that is of such a nature
that it necessarily gives us something only when it is already too late? Then, at that moment, we
understand that the grasp of time or the grasp of an aspect of time is at one with the process of
degradation. Which means that there will be many others. And so – and this amounts to the same
thing – what are the main differences between expressionist acting, naturalist acting and realist
acting? Now, if you don't mind, I have to go to the secretary's office… [Interruption of the
recording] [31:12]
… Is it closed? Is it open? I hardly dare venture into a problem as complicated as the question of the
actor. But it is clear that there are problems pertaining to the actor... but we can only consider these
problems of the actor insofar as we begin from the assumption that an actor does not represent a
fiction and does not represent a fictitious character. I mean that regarding this point, the question of
whether the actor identifies or not with their role is a question that is both meaningless and is of
strictly no interest since acting begins from the moment when another problem arises and when the
actor is in another element. This is not to speak badly, for example, of Brecht's ideas on the
distancing effect,18 since I believe that, on the contrary, Brecht's ideas of distancing involve and
respond to a problem that has nothing whatsoever to do with the actor in terms of their playing a
role. It is from the moment that the actor is defined as someone who does something other than play
a role that we can speak of a problem of the actor.
So, what does an actor do given that he or she doesn't play a role? And I suppose that any actor sees
themselves as doing something other than playing a role. Playing a role is a notion that seems to
me, absolutely meaningless. No great actor, and I suppose not even the bad ones - well, maybe the
bad ones are the ones who do play a role... so what is it that actors do? What do they do? Since once
again, this is something important insofar as it goes beyond a problem pertaining merely to the actor
in themselves, because what the actor does is actually what the spectator experiences.
Well, I would say – I return to Peirce's categories, since they are very useful to me: firstness,
secondness, thirdness – I would almost say, well – and here again I'm not going to be exhaustive –
there are actors of firstness – and this is all the more reason to go back to my eternal refrain – I'm
not saying they are worse than others, I'm not saying that actors of secondness will necessarily be
any better than actors of firstness, or actors of thirdness, if such a thing exists. But you will
remember that, according to Peirce, firstness was pure affection, or affect, which related only to
itself or to an any-space-whatever; secondness concerned power-qualities, which is to say affects as
they are actualized in different milieus... in fact secondness was a question of duels – hence the
expression “secondness” – and thirdness was, as Peirce told us, something related to a mental space.
So of course, there was already something mental about the affective, but he was thinking about the
mental in a very particular sense.
So, I like this, because I find it useful. It's not simply that I like it, I would say: let's try to see if it
works. There would be actors of firstness, actors of secondness, actors of thirdness, and then
naturally, the future is quite open. Maybe we'll discover all sorts of other types of actors. But at
least, let me say this, as I think it's worth noting, even if it's not yet completely solid, let's say that
the expressionist actor was typically an actor of firstness. Why is this? And in his field, he is strictly
unsurpassable, because how does he define himself? He doesn't play a role. What does he do? He
expresses affects, affects not being states of mind, affects being what?
Affects – I remind you from our previous analyses – being entities, intensive entities that take, that
seize hold of someone or else don't seize hold of them. These are extrinsic powers or qualities that
the actor will express. So, he doesn't play a role; he expresses affects in this sense, and this is the
famous intensive acting style of the expressionist actor. In this sense, he is an actor of firstness, and
it is in this sense that I can refer to him as an "actor of firstness" since he essentially conceives his
function as that of expressing affects as entities.

                                                                                                           7

And so, one immediately understands that the fundamental trait of the expressionist actor in all his
methods is what the great expressionists constantly referred to as the process of intensification since
it is only by acting out intensities – intensity of gesture, intensity of sound, intensity of the body –
that they will be able to capture these entities, the affects they have to express. An example would
be this use of the diagonal that is a typical feature of the expressionist actor's style. Now, I want to
move on very quickly. I remind you that, therefore, this style of firstness has in fact two poles – we
saw this for expressionism as a whole – meaning that the actor, through his expression of affects,
necessarily participates in these two poles, what I called the non-organic life of things and the nonpsychological life of the spirit.
And the non-organic life of things, he will express fundamentally by way of a whole geometry of
the broken line, both in his gestures and in his active participation in the decor, in the broken lines
of the decor – the decor itself comprising diagonals, counter-diagonals and so on, a little bit like in a
Soutine painting.19 In fact, I would say that Soutine seems to me a very great Expressionist painter,
and is so precisely through his perpetual construction of diagonals counter-diagonals and of faces
that are no less than expressions of pure affect. So, and then we have the other pole... but this
participation of the broken gesture in the broken lines of the decor, is very, very important. It's
something you find in Fritz Lang in his German period. Fine.
So, the other pole is the pole of light, the luminous halo that expresses the non-psychological life of
the spirit, either in the form of the great melancholic face that reflects the non-organic life of things
– the mask of the demon – or in the form of salvation, the Expressionist ascent at the moment that a
being is saved. For example, the admirable mounting of light in the woman when Nosferatu dies,
which is opposed to the diagonal of Nosferatu dying, which gives us the two poles of the
Expressionist style. But in any case, I would say that in this sense, yes, it's never simply a question
of the non-psychological life of the spirit or the non-organic life of things as such, it's in their
relations to the decor, their relations, the breaks in their gestures, this kind of disarticulation.
There is a recurring idea of the actor becoming a marionette, you will find this everywhere, this idea
of the actor becoming a kind of puppet, okay, fine! But this still doesn't mean anything in itself. All
great actors have done this, except that there is an Expressionist way of understanding it. In fact,
there are a thousand ways of interpreting the idea of the "actor-marionette". One must be wary; one
must not believe that such a formula already qualifies an acting style. There is an expressionist
marionette of a very, very particular type, whose spasmodic gestures always indicate the broken line
that skips over transitions. Because what is at stake here is to express the affect in its intensity
together with the two poles, participation in the non-organic life of things and the actor as a being of
light that rises to the non-psychological life of the spirit.
Well, that's very... now the Naturalist actor – I'm skipping on though I'd have to say, we'll have to
go back to this... I would just point out for those who are interested, that the great actor in this
sense, the one who brought a naturalist style of acting to the French theater, was a famous man by
the name of André Antoine 20. Now Antoine – see Sadoul's Histoire du cinema 21 – was a very
important figure in cinema. He tried his hand at cinema, but I don't think that it's in Antoine's work
that we should look for the essence of the Naturalist style of acting; it would much more on the side
of Stroheim, the way Stroheim acted is very mysterious, but it is much more in Stroheim's acting.
So, this time, we should consider Stroheim as an actor, and as a Naturalist actor.
At this point, I would say very quickly, that we recognize a Naturalist actor precisely through this
question of impulses. It's an actor who points, it's an actor who... it is very interesting the way
Stroheim acted in a film that he influenced without having made it, namely he acted in Strindberg's
The Dance of Death 22, an adaptation of Strindberg, and the film is highly influenced – it's a film by
Marcel Cravenne – it's very influenced by Stroheim, even if he only acted in it 23. Now it's very
strange, this style of acting: it's a question of acting in a determined milieu, but at the same time – I
don't quite know how to put this – at the same time, of inhabiting, of occupying this determined
milieu... I would say, at the same time in the manner of a beast. But that's not quite it... it's a bit like

                                                                                                        8

that, in the manner of a beast. It can be a noble beast, it's not necessarily a vile beast; think, for
example, of Stroheim's acting in The Grand Illusion 24. It can be a noble beast; it can be whatever
you like. But it's always a question of evoking in this determined milieu and through a realistic style
of acting, the originary world from which this milieu supposedly arises, that is to say to arrive at
this type of violence which is really the violence of origins, but which is played out in a bourgeois
salon or in a princedom and so on. There is a formula for the Naturalist acting style, which is very,
very curious: the violence of impulses. Which is what I was saying about this slope, finally.
What interests me, then, is the other type of acting that we can well call "realist” acting, because it
has had such an influence on the cinema, and I already mentioned why, it seems to me, it left such a
mark on American cinema. It has marked American cinema to the point that it gave rise to a whole
school of acting through which the majority of American actors have passed, the famous school
known as method acting or the Actors Studio. But in what way is this acting style? I would say that
the Actors Studio method is quite simple: it is the magic formula of American cinema. So, once
again, it's not better; we'd have to say that at the present moment, and not before time, things will
have to change. At the moment, I have the impression that it's coming to an end, for reasons that
also have to do with the way American cinema has evolved, but it has informed, and continues to
inform what every year we'd have to call the classic American film; each year a very successful,
high quality film is released, which is the American film of the year and which always consists in
confronting, through the S-A-S' scheme... in confronting one or more characters with the American
requirement of S-A-S', that is to say, Oh central character – I'm speaking to the character – will you
be able, oh central character, in accordance with the variations in the situation shown by the image...
will you be to raise a habitus through which you can respond to such a situation and know how to
transform it?
Now if this is the task of the actor, he doesn't play a role. But there was someone at that time – what
I'm saying here is well known, but for those who don't know, I'll make a quick summary – a very
great inventor and a follower what he claimed to be of naturalism, but which was in fact realism, it
wasn't naturalism at all. And this was Stanislavski 25, and Stanislavski was extremely important.
And then he was introduced or rather his method, which was actually called "the method", was
introduced in America, through this institution which was the Actors Studio, founded by Lee
Strasberg who died just recently and Elia Kazan. Kazan, a perfect case of a recent émigré, much
like Forman. And of course, these are the directors who make the classic American films! At the
same time that America inspires them to discover the great S-A-S' formula, it is their own invention
of the S-A-S' formula or their own discoveries within that formula that draw them towards America.
So, in all of Kazan's cinema, that's what you have. No matter what the cost, I, that is, my hero, will
be able to construct the habitus needed to confront the situation. And what will S' be? S' will be
America as we dream of it: Kazan's America, America 26. In the end, the little Greek boy arrives,
and he can kiss the pier, he can kiss the pier of New York, and it's good that it's shown in this
dreamlike way, through what is a kind of oneiric image: "finally New York", "finally the Statue of
Liberty". The S'. The poor little Greek boy started off from the Turkish Empire, S, a series of
actions, A, where each time he raises the habitus necessary to overcome the obstacles, thus proving
himself worthy of arriving in America. Worthy, worthy, but at what price? Sometimes one that
borders on cowardice, sometimes one that borders on being a gigolo – I can't find the word, well, on
living off a woman – sometimes one that borders on... sometimes it's murder, sometimes it borders
on denunciation. Well, Kazan, had some dealings with that! He knows all about it, but he keeps
something pure in his heart, because despite everything it was the habitus required by the situation.
And this is what makes America, America a classic American film. Okay, in all his films Kazan
never stopped talking about his own case. Well, it's the great formula S-A-S'. Or if it's not S'; if S' is
not the America of our dreams, it will be the America that has disappointed its immigrants, but there
too, we have to get used to it, we have to deal with it, we have to create the habitus that will let the
hero understand that America is also this and yet it remains the most beautiful country there is. So

                                                                                                         9

then, America, America is remade every year, and each time by a very talented guy. It's the classic
American film. The last one was Arthur Penn's Four Friends… 27 He made his America, America.
All right. One more time, this is the twelfth time. Every time, we are told that it's new, that it's great.
It's the American film of the year and typically it still fits the S-A-S' formula and comes from the
Actors Studio.
So what is an Actors Studio actor? I imagine him like this – you know, I don't know anything about
cinema, and that's perfect – but I imagine it like this: he's an actor, an actor of secondness, of
milieu-action, milieu-response, milieu-behavior, and the behavior is supposed to bring about a
change. What does this imply? It implies two moments. It implies that – now the actor doesn't play
a role – in a first moment, he has to internalize the givens of the situation; he has to internalize the
situation, the givens of the situation, but in what form? In the form of micro-movements,
movements that might be barely perceptible, a whole method of micro-movements. Stanislavski
was not so much interested in the gymnastics of the body as in micro-movements of hands, micromovements of the face. Those who don't like the actors of the Actors Studio, how do they recognize
them? The reproach made to them is normally this: "but they should calm down! They never stop,
they never stop. It's not that they move all the time, but even when they are still, they never stop.
This is why Hitchcock hated Paul Newman; he said with Newman, there was no way to get him to
hold still. I mean, you couldn’t get a neutral look from him. He doesn't how to... all the time he's
internalizing the givens of the situation, micro tics, micro-tics, ... well. When they're brilliantly
directed, it's great, whether it's Brando or Newman. When they're well directed, when they have...
but when it's a hack director, at that point, obviously, it's terribly full of tics; the tic is a kind of
internalization of the givens of the situation.
You see, it is not a question... for the Stanislavski or Strasberg actor it is not at all a question of
identifying with the character, it's a completely different operation. That's why the actor of the
Actors Studio can't be said to act any more than another kind of actor. Actors never play a role.
What they do is something else: they identify the givens of a situation with certain elements that
exist within them. This is what the internalization of givens is all about: it's a question of the actor
identifying the elements of the situation with pre-existing elements that exist within him, and it's by
this method of internalization through micro-movements, that he will proceed, until... until what
happens? These micro-movements have a purpose: to arouse what Stanislavski already called an
"emotional experience” and what Strasberg, under the influence of psychoanalysis, what Strasberg
will push much further than Stanislavski, and this will even be his most original contribution,
namely, to discover a real emotional experience that has been lived by the actor in his own past, and
that must be made to connect directly or indirectly with the situation, with the given situation…
with the theatrical or cinematic situation.
For example, let's imagine an actor has to play a scene where he's drunk. Here it's a question...
through all kinds of micro-movements the actor will internalize the elements of this situation until
he reaches a core within himself of an analogous past experience. So, this can be the actor himself
no longer just as an actor, but as a human being at a moment when he was really drunk. But it may
very well be that he has never been drunk, if he is a good American. So, it doesn't matter; he'll
access a similar emotional experience, for example, a fever where he had a dry mouth and wobbly
legs, and it is a question of reactualizing this emotion he has personally experienced. It is important,
Strasberg was keen to insist, it is important that this isn't a recent experience. Because, in that case,
he starts to mime. But here it is not a question of miming but of attaining this emotional core, which
is why it is an operation relatively close to certain conceptions of psychoanalysis.
And if he can't do this, Strasberg says, then there must be some reason. Why can't he do it? Why
can't he internalize a given situation? And this is why he conceived his task less in terms of training
actors than of responding to the difficulties of an actor, responding to the problems an actor has.
And this is why all the actors kept going to Strasberg and saying, well, I can't do it, there's
something that's not working. In other words, they couldn't generate the emotional experience, the

                                                                                                         10

memory – that's the exact word Stanislavski and Strasberg used – the emotional memory. So, all this
would be the first movement of the Actors Studio. This internalization of the situation.
And then we have the second movement: once the situation is interiorized, once it has been
connected to the emotional core proper to the actor – you see that the actor isn't acting, he is doing
something else, something very positive. We can define what he is doing independently of any
reference to a form of play such as a role-playing game – once he has achieved this internalisation,
he is able to perform the act. But what act? The cinematographic or theatrical act, that is, an act that
must have all the freshness of an act that is actually performed, even though we know that it is a
fictitious act. Of course, the actor doesn't really kill his victim. Or if he brushes his teeth, he doesn't
really brush his teeth. Even if he does brush his teeth, it's fictitious, since he does it at a moment
when he doesn't really need to. What happens is that the act performed by the actor according to the
requirements of the script must have the spontaneity of a real act, which would be the response of
Strasberg or already of Stanislavski... It will have… [Interruption of the recording] [58:02]

Part 2
... invention and spontaneity. So here we have two... to make this clear, I can think of a text by
Bergson which obviously has nothing to do with all this, but let's use everything we find. Bergson
explains that in life there are two processes that either divide or link up with each other. He says that
life is a two-stage, double operation. First operation: storing energy. What is it that does this? It is
actually the role of plants. A plant stores up energy to signal that it is not mobile, it's immobile. And
it has sacrificed mobility precisely to store up energy. Okay, but then we can say that it is traversed
by a whole series of micro-movements that accompany the storing up of energy, micro-movements
that happen in one frozen spot. And then you have the second process, Bergson says, which follows
on from the first. Having stored up energy, life being a continuous process of storing energy, the
second process consists in a discontinuous discharge of explosive acts. This is the animal side. In
the great branchings of life, the plant is responsible for storing up energy while the animal has the
task of exploding in discontinuous actions.
But from the point of view of life, this constitutes a sequence. Life is an inseparable process by
which a living being stores up energy, which it then uses to trigger discontinuous actions, to
detonate the explosive. We store up the explosive and we make it detonate in discontinuous actions,
hence the kind of acting style favored by the Actors Studio that occasionally borders on hysteria.
These periods of slowness – in this you can immediately recognize an Actors Studio actor – this is
what I called the realist style, and you know it corresponds to the S-A-S' formula, the S-A-S'
formula which is the classic formula of American cinema. As a first step, from S to before A ... from
S to minus A, if you like, or to almost A: storing up energy to arrive to the core emotional
experience, at least... no, to the memorial core, to get to the memorial core of the emotion.
Second step, violent discharge of the explosive. Now this is the formula – which is why I won't say
any more about it – this is the formula of the great Kazan films, and it's also the formula of the
actors trained by Kazan and Strasberg. If you think about the style of James Dean who was so
important, or Brando's acting or that of Newman, as well as a number of great American actresses
who act in a kind of hysterical style. At the same time, what tells us that the actor is not reduced to
this is that it no longer counts with the new generation of American actors, so at least we have a
future before us. It's no longer about that. And in the same way, to the best of my knowledge, you
will hardly find... I don't even know if there are any French actors who... or if not, they must be very
bad ones... who act in this way. There is one French actress who is quite Actors Studio, and as I
admire her a lot, I can tell you who she is: it's Delphine Seyrig.28 Delphine Seyrig who has a certain
very odd Actors Studio style, this perpetual storing up, storing up of energy with explosive acts. For
example, Muriel is wonderful. She acts in that. But in the end, it is not so typical of her, but
nonetheless it seems to me...

                                                                                                          11

So, I come back to Arthur Penn's film, Four Friends, because I suppose some of you must have
seen it. So, in what way... how is it a typical Actors Studio film, meaning a film in the lineage of
Kazan? It's fairly easy to see how. Take the major scenes: what happens in them? The young guy,
the poor son of a recent immigrant, arrives at the family home of the millionaire tycoon whose
daughter he wants to marry. So, what happens? An icy family lunch, the atmosphere is glacial, the
tension rises. At this point, you see that each of the guests is internalizing the situation in their own
way. The tension mounts, which means there is a whole system of micro movements of waiting, the
father who glares at his rival, his future son-in-law, all this and then the daughter who has her nose
in her plate and so on. One has the impression that, even if they are immobile, nothing is still. This
proves Hitchcock's point about it being impossible to get a neutral moment of rest from this kind of
actor. Everything, they will do everything except play the scene neutrally, they're like a ruminant
species. This is all rumination, it's a great rumination, it's the storing up of energy. And it responds
to the situation though a corresponding internalization.
And then the father pronounces an action-sentence. The action-sentence is: I'm not used to letting
something that belongs to me be taken away. 29 The daughter cows down over her soup a little more
because she's not used to this. And afterwards, it's not only the actor who learns, it's conceivable
that he does learn something, after all he's supposed to learn, but what does the spectator learn? –
You can't imagine, those of you who haven't seen Four Friends, how this is connected to the overall
story, but the guy learns something fundamental that is already S'. The sentence was an explosive
action of the father. A sentence can be an action in cinema; a sentence is an action. A sentence is a
form of behaviour. What is it? None of this is normal. S was: the father is reluctant to let his
daughter marry because the young guy is beneath her social level. After the sentence, you have S',
namely that the father in fact has an incestuous relationship with his daughter. So, you have the SA-S' structure in full.
So, internalization, what does this mean? How does he act, this father who plays his role so
wonderfully – it's pure Actors Studio, quite wonderful? He's there, completely icy. He stores, he
stores up the tension – and being a great actor, ah yes, he passes it on so it acts upon the spectator,
it's really effective – he stores up the tension. Well, and then he unleashes his sentence, he throws
his sentence like a punch at the son-in-law. And the son-in-law will respond, it will be a duel. The
situation has changed, everyone understands: this is not a father who wants to let his daughter
marry. It is a father who wants to keep his daughter to himself because he is in love with her and
there is a real incestuous relationship between them.
Then comes the wedding. And we have a typical image that could have Kazan's signature: you have
the party, the garden party, so there is the party. The father again has to internalize the situation:
there's an enormous window, a darkly transparent pane of glass behind which the father stands
rigidly looking down at the party. His face expresses all kinds of micro-movements, a kind of mix
of hatred and disgust as he reflects on what he will do and so on. Everything passes through the
face. Indeed, he can't calm down. You could shake him, but he would still stand stiff as a post. It's
impossible to get him to calm down. There's no way you can get that from an Actors Studio actor.
And then, well, there is a small detail which really enhances the tableau, which is that nobody sees
the father, except a small boy who happens to pass by and thinks: what a strange figure. So we see
this little kid looking at the figure of the father, stiff as a post, and then a long, slow storing up. And
then finally you have the action: the father goes out and kills his daughter with a revolver. You
couldn't have a more explosive act. And then he shoots his son-in-law. He has turned to murder.
And here you have the typical S-A-S' formula. Now this is really the style, I would say, it’s the
style of the Actors Studio, a style that we find as much in theatre as in cinema, what was the
American style par excellence, which is to say the style of secondness. You have these perpetual
duels, situations, internalization of the situations, the duel, then the modified situation. And then it
starts again: the modified situation, replaying of the duel and so on, and this is what you essentially
have in Kazan's – by which I mean, once again, classic American – cinema. And this is also the

                                                                                                         12

structure of Forman's films.
And I would say that not by chance is this finally the great trial, the parable of the guy who comes
to America. It seems to me that in the story of the great filmmakers who have lived in America, it
turns out well if you submit to this form, yet in a sense it's been ruinous. It has produced some great
things, but it's also been disastrous. It was a question of: if you submit to this form, we accept you,
we'll take you in". Any person who wants to emigrate there has to compete within this form.
Forman passes through this. It's beautiful, but at the same time it's sad. Yet finally, the future is
bright because once again, American cinema like all cinema is continually evolving and once more I
have the impression that the current generation of American actors is very different.
But you see there is still one last problem in my story, in my trial. So, much as we now feel sure of
the cinematic categories of firstness and secondness, we haven't really defined thirdness yet. We've
seen a little bit of what thirdness is for Peirce. But I can't use this here, because what he tells us, it
seems to me, is an analysis – I'm sorry to say, and you should take this with all due caution – too
weak an analysis of thirdness. Everything he tells us about the law and so on. All I will retain from
Peirce is that thirdness is something you don't obtain by simply multiplying duels. That is to say, it
is not by making several duels that one obtains a third. He just tells us – and this is the only thing I
want to keep – that thirdness is the mental. But what is the mental? This is what we have to
discover. We can't expect to find it in Peirce.
All I'm saying, to keep the question open is that there will obviously be actors of thirdness. And
maybe there were certain actors of thirdness in the past, but this is clearly one of the major
problems that today's actors face, and that it's not only American cinema – maybe we've had enough
of that, it could be that it's exhausted itself by now but once again, it's not a question of what is
better; it's a question of change and mutation, and at the moment, the problem of cinema, and we'll
see this in myriad ways, is how to introduce thirdness, or the purely mental, into the
cinematographic image, and there are a number of great actors from all countries, including some
French actors, who have for a long time been acting in a style that could be defined as a style of
thirdness.
And here we will a tackle a field which I find quite fascinating, the idea of the actor who... no more
than anyone else does not play a role, the idea of the actor-marionette or as a great theorist of the
theater says, the uber-marionette actor or the hyper-marionette 30. And the whole idea of "death to
the actor"... but "death to the actor" doesn't mean anything, it doesn't mean anything for a simple
reason which is that there is no actor. If an actor is any good, he is no longer an actor. We have seen
this. If we want to define "death to the actor" it means, death to the one who plays a role, who
presumes to represent a fictional character. Again, to my knowledge there has never been a great
actor or one in any way aware of his craft who has given himself this task. So "death to the actor"
doesn't mean anything, since the actors who would have to be killed have never existed, again,
except for pre-packaged actors. Otherwise, any actor who has an awareness of these problems has
done something of another nature.
Okay, but let's consider the style of thirdness. So, to establish some things that should be selfevident, let's stay on the level of questions, and this will have an influence upon the whole of the
corresponding cinema. So, we'll start with the famous things we are always hearing about, of which
there are a lot, such as Brecht's distancing effect. We haven't yet asked ourselves if this has had an
influence on cinema. Maybe, maybe not… I don't know. But anyway, wouldn't this be a way of
introducing thirdness into the image? Is it not a way of introducing the mental sphere into the
image? Or one of the ways, one of the ways, because… well, it would be only one. But let's put that
aside for the moment.
But there is someone in French cinema of direct concern to us, on account of his very strange
conception of the actor, namely Bresson. 31 Who is Bresson and what is a Bressonian actor? He
refuses to use the word marionette because he is a man who doesn’t want to offend anyone,

                                                                                                         13

although this in itself wouldn't be offensive. And what he says is that he's not an actor, he's a model,
a model, but after all a model is exactly what sculptors identify with the marionette. Well, here we
have a model. So, what is Bresson's model? What is this style of acting that is so recognizable?
Well, I can think of many, many other actors who are really actors of the mental, actors of thirdness.
Does this mean that they pretend to think? Of course not. That's not how an actor of thirdness
functions. It's not by pretending to think. It's something else. So, what technique does this imply?
What does it mean considered as an actor's problem? Well, if you put together – though I would say
there are many different kinds – the generation of modern actors, the generation of actors who are
now in their thirties, I have the impression that among them, you have many actors who are really –
we'll see why this is – after the cinema of the Nouvelle Vague you have a very odd conception of
the actor. We'll see this, the Nouvelle Vague actor, the Bressonian actor, we'll look for other things.
I would say, I not going to reveal everything for the moment. I'm saying, you can see that here too,
as we saw earlier in the case of degradation, we still have a very long way to go regarding the timeimage. And if at the end of this short presentation on the question of the actor, we still have a very
long way to go, a huge programme to cover, this time on the thought-image, what will thirdness
have to with all of this? So, this is what I wanted to add ... but I still want to accelerate things, do
you think you can keep up for a bit longer?
So, I would say: well, you see it's not difficult to understand. We've just finished one pole of the
action-image. The one thing we hold on to is that for each of our image types, we obtain two poles
provided that it's not just a simplistic schema. So, we had two poles of the affection-image; this is
just to be clear, in fact it could be four poles, or even five. We had two poles of the affection-image,
two poles of the perception-image. So, I need another pole of the action-image, and fortunately,
fortunately, it arrives quite naturally, it's something I really needed but, in any case, it's self-evident
So what is it? I only have to take the opposite of what I just said and then see if such a thing exists.
In this way you can even anticipate what I'm going to say, which is that the second pole of the
action-image is what we should call the small form. It's the small form.
So, there is a small form of the action-image. And would it have a formula? Well, yes, it would have
a formula. It would be – we saw this last time, when we were just starting... I think, we had just
started this – it would be A-S-A'... A-S-A'. Indeed, it's very different. Already, I can ask myself,
keeping it open for the future: do the tow forms mix? Can the two be mixed, the small and the large
form? Of course. But perhaps it's only some very extraordinary filmmakers who have been able to
mix the large and the small form. Otherwise, you have directors who are specialists in the large
form and others who are specialists in the small form, but let's remember that the small form is no
less great than the large. Or there are directors, great directors who alternate, sometimes making a
large form film and sometimes a small form film, because they like to vary the combinations. And
perhaps also because the small form, as its name indicates, is often less expensive than the large
form, it's cheaper. But this isn't an iron law. There are some small form films that were very
expensive. There have been a number of big budget small form films. But when you've no money
small form films are easier to make.
But what is this A-S-A'? Well, you see how it's actually the inverse, since instead of starting from
the situation through a rather complex process which, if you remember from last time, implies
parallel-montage action sequences, a whole series of duels and reactions upon the situation, all of
which is very costly in terms of set design, editing and the general mise-en-scène. But in this case
what you have is the following: you begin with an action, and the situation is only established in
terms of what the action can show... and what it shows you of the situation provokes a new action.
In other words, what is the fundamental characteristic of the small form? The ellipsis. If you
remember, before, to employ the technical terms we borrowed from Peirce regarding the large form,
we moved from synsign to index, that is, from the milieu to the duel. Now we're doing just the
opposite. We go from the index to the situation in ellipsis, which will plunge us into an A', that is, a

                                                                                                        14

new action or, as we saw before, the repetition of the same action, in which case you will have A-SA. In many of the gags you find in burlesque comedy, for example, you often have an A-S-A
formula. But A-S-A can also be A- S-A' since repetition elevates the matter to a new power, or even
a constant process, such as the custard pie fight, a process that is taken up and brilliantly reinvented
by Laurel and Hardy, and so on. So, this is my starting point.
I would say that the figure proper to this formula is no longer... it is no longer the spiral. It is the
ellipsis (ellipse). At the same time, I seem to be playing on words. But this is just appearance
because I have used the word ellipsis in two quite different senses. I began by saying: there is
ellipsis in that you only know about the situation what the previous action has shown you. And
there, I was using ellipsis in the rhetorical sense of something that is missing. Etymologically
speaking, ellipsis denotes a lack. So now when I say that the figure of this formula is the ellipse 32, I
blithely slip to another meaning – which would be inadmissible if I did not explain what it was – to
another sense of the word ellipse, the ellipse as a geometrical figure. Why the same word? It isn't by
chance since ellipse in the sense of geometrical figure derives from the same root as ellipsis in
terms of lack, which means that the geometrical ellipse is also a kind of lack. But a lack in relation
to what? It refers to the theory of conical forms: the ellipse being a lack, the hyperbole an excess in
relation to the circle. It's not for its own sake that I refer to this. What concerns me is to show how
at the level of the A-S-A' cinematographic image, the two are necessarily linked, that is to say, an
elliptical form in the geometrical sense of the succession of images and an ellipsis in this same
succession in the rhetorical sense are inevitably connected, and one leads to the other, as we shall
see.
So, okay then, in the case of S-A-S', I had begun with an example that I considered to be typical,
exemplary even, Sjöström's The Wind which seemed to represent the S-A-S' structure in its purest
state, and we saw that this confirms – I remind you that The Wind is the first film that Sjöström
made when he arrived in America – this confirms the tendency of American cinema towards the SA-S' formula. But, but, but... now I need a similar example for A-S-A', and thank God, it is provided
in the histories of the cinema.
And it's a famous film by Charlie Chaplin, namely A Woman of Paris 33, a silent film in which
Chaplin's tramp didn't appear though he directed it, and the fact that he directed it no doubt irritated
some people who said that he had nothing to do with cinema, that he used cinema but that – and
here he makes his apprenticeship as a director, it is not that he invents anything, one can always
find precedents, but he establishes a new formula that for the time A Woman of Paris was made is
nonetheless completely new. There had been comedies before of this type, such as the comedies of
Cecil B. de Mille, but this film of Chaplin, A Woman of Paris was to have an extraordinary
influence on some of the great directors to come.
And why is this film so celebrated? I'm trying to give you a sense of what A-S-A' really is. So, to
take an example – these examples are all quite famous and as I said are mentioned in all the
histories of the cinema. So, I'll recap them here so you can follow better what I'm saying. A train
arrives, but you don't see the train. When I said the small form is less expensive, obviously it means
that it costs less money. Besides, Chaplin couldn't get the kind of train he needed. So, we don't see
the train. But what do we see? The train arrives at a station platform, and we see only its shadow,
that is, the action of the train, the action of the train, the effect of the train, the shadow of the train
sliding up to the platform and – in an admirable image – passing across, through an alternation of
lights and shadows representing the train – passing across the face of the heroine who waits on the
platform. Well, you see how this is already an A-S structure. This time, it's beginning from the
action of the train upon the platform, and upon the heroine's face that I infer a situation A, the train's
arrival and the fact that she's waiting for someone.
Second example – here we have a very powerful ellipsis - second example: a man comes to see the
heroine, Marie – the heroine's name is Marie – a man comes to Marie's house, and he goes to fetch a
handkerchief from the dresser. These are examples cited by Chaplin himself, by Chaplin himself,

                                                                                                        15

who sketched out the tableau of what innovations he was trying to introduce at the time. He fetches
a handkerchief from the dresser, and everyone understands that he must be her lover. A strong
ellipsis. It's from a very simple action that we are able to infer the situation. And here you have the
A-S structure.
Another more complex case, even if its of the same type: Mary is looking for a dress in front of her
former lover, and while she's looking for the dress in the wardrobe, in the chest of drawers, she
drops a detachable collar from the chest of drawers. The lover understands everything. The lover is
in the foreground, and he looks at Mary with love. And she is looking for her dress, she's in the
background. And the man's detachable collar falls, and he understands everything. He understands
that she has a new lover. There too, it's typical A-S. Well, the film is... A critic of the time employs
an expression that seems to me very apt: "The film proceeds like a mosaic of details", a mosaic of
details, that is, it is really A-S-A'.
It is apt, and at the same time it is not apt. Apt and yet not apt, but why? I would say that... I will use
mathematical terms, even if I will only be able to justify these next week. In mathematical terms, I
would say that the formula S-A-S' – the large form – is a "global” formula and defines a global
image or a global treatment of the action-image. And I would say that the formula A-S-A' is a
"local" formula and consists in a local treatment of the action-image – global and local being terms
which mathematicians like to use in what is called the theory of functions. What does this mean?
Why do I prefer these words? We mustn't let ourselves be led astray. "Mosaic of details" is not quite
right because that would imply that the formula A-S-A' moves from one part to another while the
formula S-A-S' moves from the whole to the parts. This would be a very inadequate understanding,
although it wouldn't be completely wrong. But it would be an insufficient way of understanding
this because I believe that in both formulas, you have the formation of a totality, but by way of two
quite different procedures. So also, in the second formula – the local formula – there will clearly be
the constitution of a whole, but it will be through procedures completely different to those of the SA-S' totality.
To make this even clearer – and I would like to end on this point – I'll take another case. So, let's
now look at who the great directors are... the great directors of the old silent cinema. So afterwards
you have... I'll take an example: Lubitsch 34 ; Lubitsch never hid his fundamental debt to A Woman
of Paris. And what is called the “Lubitsch touch” 35, this famous Lubitsch touch, what does it
consist of? Precisely in a particularly deft, particularly tight, particularly advanced handling of the
formula A-S-A', one that lets see of a situation only what is expressed by an action in the process of
being performed, and all of Lubitsch's great effects come from this, his art of what we call... his art
of suggestion and innuendo, that is, his art of ellipsis.
Another example... does this mean that they are both authors of the small form? Maybe, we'll see, it
would be something to investigate. Another example I want to give you to think about between now
and last week, uh, I mean next week ... It's odd that I would say last week – is Pudovkin's Storm
over Asia 36. There's a statement by Pudovkin 37, this great Soviet filmmaker that I find very
striking. He says: "What was decisive for me, I knew I was going to make this film when the
following image came to me." Listen carefully: we see an English officer – this is interesting
because he already had the idea for the script, of everything he wanted to say, but it didn't work.
What made it work for him so he could say to himself: "I have my film" is the following detail: he
imagines an English officer – one can even think that it could be a just a close-up of his boots,
whose boots are well-waxed and who is walking on a very dirty sidewalk, walking in the manner of
an English officer who's very careful about his boots, which is to say, avoiding puddles and making
sure the boots stay immaculate. Good. Next shot: the same, we assume we have the same close-up
of the boots but this time he's dragging his feet, and he's walking through puddles and so on and his
boots are filthy. And Pudovkin says, what has happened between the two scenes? What has
happened? We have the typical A-S-A'. Pudovkin's answer is that in the meantime the English
officer has committed an action so contrary to the honor, to the honor of an upstanding officer that

                                                                                                                   16

he no longer cares about his boots or their state of cleanliness because it's his soul that is soiled.
Pure A-S-A' structure. 38
Could I from such small examples arrive at the idea that there are particular genres that correspond
to the small form? I would say yes and leave it at that. Yes, I could. There was a Flaherty
documentary corresponding to the large form, this is the Flaherty pole, as we saw, of situationmilieu, situation-action – I have already spoken about this at length, so this is the last time I'm going
to mention it and I won't come back to it. Against Flaherty what very quickly took shape was the socalled "English school", the pre-war English school whose great theorist was John Grierson 39 and
which was developing an A-S-A' type documentary. I'll explain a little bit about this, and I'll
delineate my oppositions point by point.
Second case: we had looked at the psycho-social drama, to which is opposed a small form. So then,
the large form would be the psycho-social drama which would be opposed the small form of the
comedy of manners such as A Woman of Paris. It's very different. We had seen the large form in the
historical epic; the small form here – the Germans have a word for it – would be the costume
drama; it seems to me very different from the historical film. And is it surprising that the great
director of the costume film in German cinema – in German silent cinema, before he came to
America – was Lubitsch? 40
Large form: we had looked at the film noir gangster film of the Scarface type. In this case the small
form is necessarily the detective film, the detective film, even if it's a big budget production is
necessarily a small-form film. What else can it be in comparison to the film noir? 41 The gangster
film is necessarily a large-form film, whereas the detective film is necessarily a small-form film
because there you go from the index... you go from the index to the situation.
And finally, you have the large form of the western, and wouldn't this be the case with Ford? And
then the small-form neo-Western – but let's be careful, this opens a whole new can of worms –
because is it legitimate to adhere to the classical distinction between the epic Western on one hand
and the tragic or romantic Western on the other? Maybe not, maybe the two don't coincide. Maybe
we'll have to take up the question of the Western from the point of view of the action-image if we
want to see what constitutes the large form and the small form in this case.
So, we've now reached a point where we can see the possibilities open to a director such as Hawks,
for example. He continually alternates – almost as if he occasionally needed a rest – between largeand small-form films. The greatest directors, in my view, manage to combine the large and the small
form to create something wholly original. But then there also great authors who are mainly
specialists of the large form, and others who are specialists of the small form, all of which will
complicate matters for us.
But the problem we've now reached, and which I'll tackle next time, is how to compare, and what
distinctions we can make, between the laws of the small form that we haven't yet looked at and the
laws of the large form that we've already seen. [End of the recording] [1:38:39]

Notes
  Nosferatu: a Symphony of Horror (Orig. Nosferatu – Eine Symphonie des Grauens ,1922) is a silent horror film
directed by F.W. Murnau starring Max Schrek as the vampire Count Oriek. The film is an unoffical adaptation of Bram
Stoker's novel Dracula, for which Murnau was unable to secure the film rights. It was remade in 1979 by Werner
Herzog as Nosferatu the Vampyre with Klaus Kinski in the Schrek role.
  The Last Laugh (Orig. Der letzte Mann,1924) is a film by Murnau starring Emil Jannings and Maly Delschaft. It tells
the story of an ageing doorman to a plush hotel who because of his infirmity is demoted to the lowly rank of washroom
attendant, a humiliation that when discovered alienates him from all his family. A bizarre reversal occurs, however,
when he inherits the fortune of a millionaire patron of the hotel who died in his arms in the washroom.
  Pandora's Box (1929) is a German silent expressionist film directed by Georg Wilhelm Pabst, starring Louise Brooks,
Fritz Kortner, and Francis Lederer. Based on Frank Wedekind's plays Erdgeist (1895) and Die Büchse der Pandora

                                                                                                                           17

(1904) the film follows Lulu, a seductive, thoughtless young woman whose uninhibited nature and raw sexuality leads
both her and those who love her into ruin.
  The Blue Angel (Orig: Der blaue Engel, 1930) is a German musical comedy-drama film directed by Josef von
Sternberg, and starring Marlene Dietrich, Emil Jannings and Kurt Gerron. Loosely based on a Heinrich Mann novel, it
tells the story of a respectable professor's pursuit of a nightclub singer that leads to his ruination as he becomes a
cabaret clown and eventually descends into madness.
  Greed (1924), considered Erich von Stroheim's masterpiece and perhaps the greatest film of the silent era, is a
meticulous adaptation of Frank Norris's novel McTeague, which tells the story of of McTeague, a San Francisco dentist,
who marries his best friend Schouler's girlfriend Trina. The film was brutally cut by the studios and the original version
forever lost.
  Foolish Wives (1922), Stroheim's second major film is a silent erotic drama about a bogus Count (played by Stroheim
himself) who uses the status of his forged identity to seduce and exploit rich women. Like many of Von Stroheim's films
it was drastically cut on release.
  The Crack-Up is a collection of essays, letters and notes by F. Scott Fitzgerald first published in 1936. In the title essay
Fitzgerald recounts his alcoholic breakdown and subsequent detachment from human affairs. Deleuze and Guattari refer
extensively to this text in A Thousand Plateaus.
  The Lost Weekend (1945) is a film by Billy Wilder starring Ray Milland and Jane Wyman, about a chronically
alcoholic writer and the events of one weekend he spends battling his addiction in his increasingly futile attempts to
write a novel about it.
  One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest (1975) is a film by Czech-American director Miloš Forman starring Jack Nicholson
and Louise Fletcher, based on Ken Kesey's novel about a group of inmates of a mental institution. One of them, the
rebellious Randal McMurphy who has faked insanity in order to escape a lengthy jail term, attempts to lead the others
including a Native American chief in a campaign of resistance against the redoubtable Nurse Ratched and the hospital's
brutal regime.
   Miloš Forman (1932-2018) was a Czech director, screenwriter and actor and an important figure in the Czech new
wave of the 1960s before he emigrated to the US in 1968 following the Soviet crushing of the Prague Spring. After his
early Czech films Black Peter (1964), Loves of a Blonde (1965) and the The Fireman's Ball (1967) gained international
recognition for their ironic portrayals of life and romance under communism, Forman shot to fame with One Flew Over
The Cuckoo's Nest (1975). His subsequent films included Amadeus (1983), and two portraits of American provocateurs,
The People vs Larry Flint (1996) and Man on the Moon (1999) about situationist comedian Andy Kaufman.
   Elia Kazan was an American director of Greek origin, one of the co-founders of the Actors' Studio which, under the
leadership of Lee Strasberg, developed the school of method acting that was to dominate American cinema for several
decades and which produced such luminaries as Marlon Brando and James Dean. Kazan's most famous films include A
Streetcar Named Desire (1951), On the Waterfront (1954), East of Eden (1955) and Baby Doll (1956). After he chose to
testify against colleagues with communist sympathies before the House Committee of Un-American Activities in 1952,
Kazan fell into disfavour. His last film was the uncompleted The Last Tycoon (1976), one of the adaptations of
Fitzgerald novels about which Deleuze is somewhat less than enthusiastic.
   Rio Bravo (1959) is a Western by Howard Hawks, starring John Wayne, Dean Martin, Angie Dickinson, Ricky
Nelson, Walter Brennan and Ward Bond. It tells the story of a town sheriff who arrests the brother of a powerful the
brother of a powerful rancher for murder and who finds himself having to defend the jail where the man is kept from
assault by the ranchers' men by allying with his drunken former deputy and a couple of other unlikely though capable
helpers. Hawks would go on to remake the story twice, first as El Dorado in 1967 and then as Rio Lobo in 1970. It was
also a major influence on John Carpenter's Assault On Precinct 13 (1976).
   Founded in 1947 by Elia Kazan, Cheryl Crawford and Robert Lewis, The Actors Studio is a training school for actors
that under its director Lee Strasberg, who joined in 1951, became famous for promoting the method school of acting,
influenced by the theories of Konstantin Stanislavski, that was to dominate post-war American cinema up until the
1980s. Its members have included such esteemed actors as Marlon Brando, Karl Malden, James Dean, Marilyn Monroe,
Paul Newman, Anne Bancroft, Steve McQueen, Sidney Poitier, Dustin Hoffman, Jack Nicholson, Robert De Niro, Jane
Fonda, Harvey Keitel, Al Pacino and Ellen Burstyn.
   See F. Scott Fitzgerald, The Crack-Up, Penguin Books, 1965, p. 56.
   Sam Peckinpah (1925-1984) was an American director best known for his pioneering of the revisionist or neowestern genre and for his stylized set-peice scenes of graphic violence, which were to have a considerable influence on
the development of Hollywood action cinema. His most famous films, which include Ride the High Country (1972),
The Wild Bunch (1969), The Ballad of Cable Hogue (1971), The Getaway (1972), Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid (1973)
and Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia (1975) typically feature disillusioned anti-hero figures adrift in a cruel and
cynical landscape whose residual sense of honor and loyalty often spells their doom.
   The Losers (1963) was a single story episode of the Dick Powell Theatre Show, directed by Peckinpah and starring
Lee Marvin and Keenan Wynn as a couple of amiable card-sharps who are on the run. At one point there was an idea of
turning the short film into a series though nothing came of it. Peckinpah had previously created another series, The
Westerner, starring Brian Keith, which ran for a single season in 1960.
   See Cinema 1: The Movement-Image, op. cit p. 168.

                                                                                                                         18

   The Verfremdungseffekt, V-effekt or distancing effect (variously translated as alienation, estrangement,
defamiliarization, distanciation) was first conceptualized by Brecht, though it is closely liked to Viktor Schlovsky's
notion of “making strange”, which he claimed was the essence of all great art. It typically involves the actor acting in
such a way as to prevent the viewer from directly psychologically or emotionally identifying with him, by presenting
his character choices consciously and deliberately as something almost objectively understood. The technique, which
can involve actors directly addressing the audience, was designed to render obvious the fictional contrivances of the
medium. Though more commonly adopted in theatre than in cinema, Brecht's techniques of distancing have been
influential in the work of European directors such as Jean-Luc Godard, Jean-Marie Straub and Danièle Huillet, Rainer
Werner Fassbinder, Chantal Akerman and Hans-Jürgen Syberberg as well as American independent filmmakers like
Monte Hellman and Hal Hartley.
   Chaim Soutine (1893-1943) was a Belorusian painter who spent most of his life in France and whose work is
associated with the expressionist movement. Though ostensibly figurative, his works are characterized by an attention
to texture, colour and shape that anticipates certain aspects of abstract expressionism.
   André Antoine (1858-1943) was a French actor, theatre manager, film director, author, and critic who is considered
the father of modern mise en scène in France. Antoine founded the Théâtre Libre in Paris in 1887, whose productions
were characterised by a mixture of realism and naturalism.
   Georges Sadoul (1904-1967) was a French film critic, journalist and cinema writer. Known for his encyclopedias of
film and filmmakers, many of which have been translated into English, after the Second World War he published his
mammoth General History of Cinema (Histoire générale du cinéma) in six volumes, which surveyed films from around
the world with a particular focus on non-western cinema.
   The Dance of Death (Orig. French La danse de mort, Italian La prigioniera dell'isola) is a 1948 French-Italian drama
film directed by Marcel Cravenne, starring Erich von Stroheim, Denise Vernac and Palau. Based on August Strindberg's
play of the same name, it charts the poisonous relationship of an embittered married couple – he a military officer, she a
former actress who sacrificed her career to be with him – in a secluded fortress on a remote Swedish island.
   Stroheim was also credited as one of the co-writers of the script.
   The Grand Illusion (Orig. La Grande Illusion, 1937) is a French war film directed by Jean Renoir from a screenplay
he co-wrote with Charles Spaak and starring Jean Gabin, Dita Parlo and Ernst Von Stroheim. The film concerns a small
group of French military officers being held as prisoners of war during World War 1 and the class conflicts that emerge
among them as they plan their escape. It is commonly regarded as one of the greatest French films of all time.
   Konstantin Stanislavski (1863-1938) was a Russian and Soviet theatre practitioner and actor. Regarded in his own
lifetime as one of the finest theatre directors of his generation, Stanislavski is today most celebrated for his ‘system’ of
training actors, which favoured “the art of experiencing” over “the art of representation” and which gave rise to the
American method acting school of the Actors Studio.
   America, America (1963) is a film directed, produced and written by Elia Kazan, adapted from his own book,
published in 1962. Featuring a cast of relatively unknown actors, it follows the epic journey of a young Greek man as he
escapes from the Turkish massacre of Armenians where his friend is killed, first of all, to Constantinople where he is
exploited, humiliated and at one point left for dead, and then across the Atlantic to the USA.
   Four Friends (1981) is a film directed by Arthur Penn from a semi-autobiographical script by Steve Tesich, starring
Craig Wasson, Jodi Thelin, Jim Metzler and Glenne Headley. It tells the story of four high-school friends from the
perspective one of them, the son of a stern Yugoslavian immigrant father, an aspiring writer who attempts to make his
way through college into American high society with tragic results.
   Delphine Seyrig (1932-1990) was a Lebanese-born French actress. She is most famous for her roles in Alain Resnais'
Last Year at Marienbad (1961) and Muriel (1963), Chantal Akerman's Jeanne Dielman, 23 quai du Commerce, 1080
Bruxelles (1975) and Marguerite Duras' India Song (1975). She was also the co-founder with Carole Roussopoulos of
the 1970s feminist video collective Les insoumuses.
   The actual line from Four Friends that Deleuze is trying to recall here is: “You are looking at a man who gives
nothing away that he wants to keep.”
   In his comments here on the actor-marionette it is not entirely clear whether Deleuze is referring to Italian actordirector Carmelo Bene to whose work he dedicated the essay “One Manifesto Less”, originally published in Italian in
the book Sovvraposizioni along with Bene's translation of Shakespeare's Richard III, or to Edward Gordon Craig, a
pioneer of modernist theatre direction and set design who worked with Stanislavski and had theorized the idea of the
actor as marionette much earlier in his essay “The Art of the Theatre”, published in 1911.
   Robert Bresson (1901-1999) was a French film director who is regarded as one of the fathers of modern cinema.
Among his most celebrated works are Diary of a Country Priest (Orig. Le journal d'un curé de campagne, 1951), A
Man Escaped (Orig. Un condamné à mort s'est échappé ou Le vent souffle où il veut, 1956), Pickpocket (1959), Au
Hasard Balthazar (1966), Mouchette (1967) and The Devil, Probably (Orig. Le diable, probablement, 1977). Bresson's
austerely minimalist ideas regarding mise-en-scene and the direction of actors were extremely important for the
filmmakers who emerged from the French Nouvelle vague, particularly Godard and Straub-Huillet. He theorized his
approach to cinema including the notion of the actor as model in a short, highly influential book, Notes on the
Cinematographer, where he argues that the traditional theatre-trained actor with his expressive tics has no place in the
cinema and states his preference for “Models who have become automatic (everything weighed, measured, timed,

                                                                                                                            19

repeated ten, twenty times) and then dropped in the medium of the events of your film – their relations with the objects
and persons around them will be right, because they will not be thought.” See Robert Bresson, Notes on the
Cinematographer, trans. Jonathan Griffin, London: Quartet books, 1986.
   Here Deleuze plays on the multiple meanings of the French word ellipse which are translated in English by the two
words “ellipsis” (in terms of a temporal omission or gap) and “ellipse” (in the sense of a geometrical figure).
   A Woman of Paris (1923) is a film written and directed by Charlie Chaplin but in which he did not star, though he has
a small uncredited cameo role as a porter. It tells the story of a girl who separates from her painter lover when he is
prevented from marrying her by his sick mother. She briefly revives her romance with him after she has taken up with a
rich businessman, but the hopelessness of the situation drives him to suicide.
   Ernst Lubitsch (1892-1947) was a German-born director who was one of the leading filmmakers of German silent
cinema but who is more well-known for the scintillating comedies he made after he moved to Hollywood, including,
Design for Living (1933), Bluebeard's Eighth Wife (1938), Ninotchka (1939), The Shop Around the Corner (1940), To
Be Or Not To Be (1942) and Heaven Can Wait (1944).
   The “Lubitsch touch" is a phrase that has long been used to describe the unique style and cinematic trademarks of
director Ernst Lubitsch, a brief description that embraces a long list of virtues: sophistication, style, subtlety, wit, charm,
elegance, suavity, polished nonchalance and audacious sexual nuance.
   Storm Over Asia (Orig. Potomok Chingiskhana, 1928) is a film by Vsevolod Pudovkin, the final instalment of his
revolutionary trilogy after Mother (1926) and The End of St Petersburg (1927). Set against a fictionalised British
occupation of Southeastern Siberia and Northern Tibet it tells the story of a Mongolian trapper who becomes a Soviet
revolutionary partisan before falling into the hands of the British who refashion him as a puppet leader though he
eventually rebels.
   Vsevolod Pudovkin (1893-1953) was a Soviet film director, screenwriter and actor who developed influential theories
of montage. Pudovkin's films differ from those of his contemporary Sergei Eisenstein in that montage is used in a more
classical sense to foreground the heroism of individuals rather than the force of the masses. Perhaps for this reason he
was more favoured as an effective propagandist during the Stalinist period.
   See Cinema 1: The Movement-Image, pp. 179-180.
   John Grierson was a pioneering Scottish documentary maker who is often considered the father of British and
Canadian documentary film. In 1926, it was reputedly Grierson who coined the term "documentary" in a review of
Robert Flaherty's Moana. A friend and sometime producer of Flaherty, Grierson, though he only directed two films
himself, had a long and varied career and was instrumental in the founding of both the British GPO film unit and the
National Film Board of Canada.
   See Cinema 1: The Movement-Image, p. 163.
   Deleuze's peculiar use of the term film noir to describe large-form gangster movies like Hawks' Scarface, which he
opposes to the small-form “detective film”, cuts against a more common usage of the term to describe a particular
“hard-boiled” universe of crime and paranoia which includes both small and large form films. In The Movement-Image
for example, Deleuze categorizes Hawks' The Big Sleep and Fritz Lang's Beyond A Reasonable Doubt as small-form
detective films, even when they are acknowledged to be among the finest examples of the film noir genre, whereas
Scarface is not normally categorized primarily as a film noir.