1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema: Classification of Signs and Time, 1982-1983

Lecture 22, 31 May 1983 (Cinema Course 43)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze en ligne, Thomas Straub (Part 1) and Florencia
Rodriguez (Part 2); additional revisions to the transcription and time stamp, Charles J.
Stivale

Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

[The audio recordings of this lesson, present on the Voix de Deleuze en ligne webpage at
Paris 8 have been mixed up: part 1 actually corresponds to part 2 and vice versa. The
attribution of the two parts of the transcription has accordingly been corrected from the
mistaken reversed order given on the website.]

Part 1

...and for him, it wasn’t long, right? And then you… you can judge for yourselves how this
resonates with you. What was it that amused me in all this? What interested me was to give
you a sense, or try to give you a sense, of a breed of thinkers who, in terms of their thinking,
speak to us about characters. That is to say… I would say that in doing so they literally
change the status of what we mean by a character. Philosophers rarely speak about characters.
Of course, there are dialogues, there are philosophical characters, or non-philosophical
characters, but in these dialogues, it is the characters who speak and who put forward
concepts. The authors I deal with are completely different. They're... they continually talk
about characters, and it is these characters themselves that they elevate to the status of a
concept. This seems to me to be a kind of renewal; in fact, it was a way of renewing
philosophical thought. And obviously, this implies that just as the characters they speak about
will change their status so too will the concept. Theirs will be concepts of a new kind.

So, it is very odd indeed when Kierkegaard speaks to us of… But what comes to the
forefront, what appears on the stage of philosophy with the authors I'm talking about? Well,
some very strange things. For example, the “fiancée” not only maintains her singularity but
becomes an actual person with a proper name. Here I'm thinking of Kierkegaard’s case. Her
name is Regine, and at the same time she is a concept, a concept the likes of which we've
never seen before, right? And here we have a form of thought he will unleash that is… I can't
really call it philosophical theater, and yet these philosophers will be led to make use of very
particular modes of expression, including unfinished books, though more often a type of book
where one might say to oneself... which often provoked a state of great indignation in socalled classical or traditional philosophers… through modes of expression which seem to me
to be highly innovative.

I was telling you in the case of Kierkegaard, for example… You open some of Kierkegaard’s
books and you will see – I'm not putting Nietzsche in this basket, although his work raises a
similar problem, but again, he didn't become entangled in this thought of an alternative or
choice… that's why I'm so annoyed that I got stuck in this thought of alternative and choice,
which I think is a religious way of thinking. The reason why is not so clear. Yet at this point –
and we will look at this today – it appears to be a form of thought based on mystery. It is a

                                                                                                 2

form of thought based on faith, and if necessary, faith as opposed to religion, whichever way
you want to put it, but it is a form of thought based on faith. It's a very bizarre thing.

So, what we saw last time was... we were still within the bounds of what for us was a
relatively solid field. What we saw last time was that, under the general category of
alternative, this whole lineage proposed an anti-morality, and this anti-morality could equally
be called either the greatest immoralism or the most extreme moralism. And in what way was
this moralism or immoralism radically opposed to morality? Because as I was saying, well,
morality is always a question of what, in the end? It's a question of referring actions,
behaviors, feelings, people to values on the basis of which they can be judged. You moralize
whenever you refer one of your actions to a value, and ask yourself: "Is this right or is it
wrong?"

You are being moral or immoral or both, on the other hand, when you proceed in a
completely different way. Ultimately you don't think of judging, you have given up on
judging. You think that actions and people judge themselves. Which means, finally, that what
you're asking for is – and this is a theme that we often find in Péguy1, the one writer I haven't
yet spoken about in terms of this lineage – it's ... what we have is a weighing up ... it's a
weighing up. It's not a matter of referring actions and persons to values that will always be
transcendental. It's a matter of weighing the “immanent weight” of the modes of existence
that this person or that action implies.

Up to this point, this is all fine for us because then it would really be a question of an
immanence of modes of existence. Everything you do, everything you say, implies a certain
mode of existence. Which mode? Discover the modes of existence! And this is what I was
trying to explain last time: how, at the core of all of Pascal's thought, but also at the core of
Kierkegaard's thought, and strangely even at the core of Sartre's thought, it seemed to me that
there was a whole dynamic developing, a dynamic of weighing up modes of existence, of an
immanent weighing up of modes of existence. And from this what I tried to do was – because
it was important to me – to understand what was at stake. So, do any of you have any remarks
you’d like to make at this point, things you’ve thought about over the last week, or is all this
quite clear?

So, let's try to be even clearer then, by giving ourselves three minutes of recreation, three
minutes of cinema. Because I don’t want to do things that are too, too facile, or say things
that are too facile. What strikes me about Kierkegaard – I don't know if I mentioned this last
year or some other time – but what strikes me about Kierkegaard is that, all of a sudden, you
come across a passage written in the middle of the 19th century, which has you saying to
yourself: what is this? It's not an example that he's developing. Nor is it… I can't even say
that it's a Danish theater production for a Sunday afternoon in Copenhagen. It’s not that
either. There is something… you understand, I'm taking two examples because they are
particularly clear.

All of a sudden in one passage, Kierkegaard says… he introduces this in a passage,
something like the story of a bourgeois man who for twenty years has had breakfast with his
family, has read the newspaper with his wife and children beside him… and now, all of a
sudden, this bourgeois gets up, undoes his collar, rushes to the window and shouts: “The
possible, or I shall suffocate!”2 And that's it! My question is: what is this new way of... It's
very strange that a philosopher should talk like this… Even better, there is a very beautiful
text of Kierkegaard’s that I really like where he says… well, it's always a bourgeois, because

                                                                                                   3

he has the idea that the bourgeois cannot be distinguished. For him, the bourgeois is
imperceptible to the point that the knight of faith3, which is to say the figure of supreme value
for Kierkegaard, is according to him someone who, if you met them in the street, you'd think
he was a bourgeois4. And this too is odd. I find it very interesting because he gives us a way
to play the role of the knight of faith. You have to play him like a bourgeois, as if you were
representing a bourgeois.

Then you have another typical Kierkegaard anecdote, which is, I would say, more audacious.
A man, a man… a bourgeois, very wise, very quiet, good to children, this time single, held in
high esteem by his whole neighborhood, goes crazy for an hour a day and his madness
consists in this: he makes drawings of little children that are strictly identical. He repeats over
and over the same image of the same little child. And the things is, Kierkegaard says… in his
youth – I’m quoting the author himself here – he visited a brothel.5 And since then he has
been obsessed – and this is where this story of Kierkegaard gets really strange – what is he
obsessed by? He is obsessed by the idea that he might have conceived a child there. So, in the
Denmark of that epoch, in Copenhagen, he thinks he might have conceived a child. The
problem is, you see, that all infants look alike. So, among all those infants, which one might
be his? And this possibility anguishes him. This possibility suffocates him. It's all very
strange. There is a possibility, isn't there... there is a possibility in “The possible or else I'll
suffocate” just as there is another possibility that suffocates me. Let's start again! So, let's try
to resume our argument, I said that there are modes of existence.

So, let’s move on to cinema now. We can make these modes of existence alternate according
to a Pascalian arrangement, according to a Pascalian order. They alternate, exactly in the
same way that white, black and grey alternate. But my first task is to put things in order, that
is, to find a law of alternation. As we have seen, there is indeed an alternation in Pascal's
wager, and I would say that this alternation – to correct what I said last time a little, though I
don’t go back on it, and you'll see why – this alternation does in fact concern God. First case,
God exists. Second case, God does not exist. Third case, I don't know if God exists or not.
White, black, gray. The world will be painted in white, black and gray. As I said, this is the
alternation. Is it a matter of choosing one term of the alternation rather than another?
Absolutely not! That's why I was insisting on you reading the actual text on the wager for
yourselves. It is absolutely not a question of choosing white… of choosing between white,
black and grey – the affirmation of God, the negation of God, the uncertainty of God. It has
absolutely nothing to do with that. And yet, the alternation of terms is presupposed by the
wager. But the serious question, the wager itself can only commence afterwards and is not
concerned with this. Let's say he takes that as his “basis”. So, regarding these alternations, I
would say, let's take a pause.

I see them clearly. If you accept the lineage of these thinkers, now I can name them all, these
thinkers of faith, and strangely enough, it can be a secular faith – in the case of Sartre, it's a
secular faith. In the case of Dreyer in cinema, it is a secular faith. But it's a secular faith that
looks very much like a non-secular faith. In fact, I’ll take the two cases of Dreyer and
Bresson. There is a certain affinity between the two. What does this affinity consist in? It is
that they will present us with an alternation, and will do so even from an aesthetic point of
view – because don’t forget that aesthetics is part of all this. The rhythmic alternations of
white and black in Bresson, the geometric alternations, the way Dreyer pushes the rhythm
towards a kind of geometric composition, composing geometric alternations to the point that
what we have is almost a paving of space: a white square, a black square, a gray square or
more often a black square followed by a white square… black square, white square. It is a

                                                                                                     4

very elaborate composition of tones, a highly tonal composition, what is in the end a
geometric composition. So how is it presented?

If I try to make the list, a small list of characters, I would say there are men or women of
white. There are men or women of white. Is this a good thing? Is this what the choice is all
about? You can see right away that the answer is no. No! Why? White may be the cleanest
color in the world, but it is also the most terrifying. White is a very rich color. Why is this?
Because white is a prison for light. White imprisons light. This terrifying white, this icy
white, what is it? It is the white of the cell, or of the clinic, the cellular white or clinical white.

And who are these men of white ultimately? Pascal gives them a name. They are the devout,
they are those who have imprisoned God in white. They have imprisoned light in white. They
are the men of authority. It is a whole mode of existence. They are the tyrannically devout.
Far from choice having anything to do with them, in the alternation of terms we can say that
these are the men of no choice. And they do not leave us any choice. In the name of what? In
the name of a theological necessity. God's order, the order of good that will apply whether we
like it or not, corresponds exactly to what Pascal calls the devout. They claim not to choose,
and they want to deny us any possibility of choice. Certainly, they are not the ones who
wager, or at least who consciously wager. They have literally transformed light into
something resembling a prison, and here we have Dreyer’s great images of the presbytery6,
with the most beautiful whites that cinema has ever produced, or the great prison images of
Bresson: Jeanne's cell7, the cell of the condemned prisoner of war8. So, I would say, in my
alternation, that this is the first category: the men of white. And white is the terrible.

And then there are the men of gray, and nor will the men of gray be the men of choice… of
the choice. Why not? They are the ones who come next in the alternation, the men who by
definition say: “We don't know what to choose, we live in uncertainty.” Might there be any
examples in the films of the directors I’m referring to here, that will confirm what we focused
on last time, that will enable us to discover on another level, that of the image, what we had
tried to develop on a conceptual level? Dreyer's Vampyr: a poor hero who isn’t the vampire
but the character of uncertainty. Also, this is one of the films where Dreyer deploys, where he
develops a gray… a gray, a kind of very prodigious mist. And in Bresson, you have many
characters of uncertainty. In part, the character of Pickpocket9 who hesitates and doesn't quite
know how to choose between two equally violent emotions, that of theft and that of love. And
even more so, Lancelot du Lac10. It is not by chance that one of the titles Bresson had
imagined for Lancelot was precisely Uncertainty. What is it that he hesitates between?
Between two ways of lying in the face of courtly love – and in parenthesis, would courtly
love represent a case of true choice? Well, we shall see… But Lancelot doesn't get away with
it. He betrays courtly love in two ways. Because he sometimes, well, in fact, he constantly
hesitates between a love he has difficulty maintaining within the bounds of the courtly, and
his loyalty to the king to whom he must give back the woman he loves. Uncertainty. These
are the men of gray who take their place in the alternation.

And then, we have the men of black. Ah, the men of black! I'm sure that the first two cases
present themselves as being outside the category of choice. They deny that it is a question of
choice. The first, the devout, leave us no choice in saying: “It will be done, it's the order of
God, or simply order tout court.” The second group tell us that even if there is a choice: “I
don't know what to choose.” The men of black, at first sight, appear to choose. But what a
horrible thing they choose! They choose if not evil, because it may not make sense to say
they choose evil, in any case they choose for evil. They wager on evil. And at first sight, what

                                                                                                5

can prevent me from wagering on evil? Notice that it will not be the same. Already a
consolation: it will never be the same evil that I do and that I continue to do by saying “It's
not my fault, I have no choice!” If I choose laziness… then I choose laziness, it is certain that
by choosing this laziness, I raise laziness to a power that makes it nothing like the laziness I
assume when I say: “I have no choice, it is not my fault, I cannot work.” If I could choose…
but can I choose laziness? If I could choose laziness, I would raise it to the nth power. If I
could choose evil, maybe it would be raised to the nth power. We don't know. Who are these
men of black? They seem to choose.

And there are some cases of this in the work of the two directors that I refer to here. There are
many both in Dreyer's films and in those of Bresson. In Bresson, in Les dames du Bois de
Boulogne11, there is Hélène and her revenge, her ruthless revenge. It is the story of an act of
revenge, and it is a revenge she has chosen. The central character of Pickpocket, meanwhile,
deliberately chooses to steal. In Bresson’s last film the situation becomes more complicated,
because at the core of this last film, L'Argent12, it seems to me, is a couple, a very Bressonian
couple, the couple of two boys, the boy of white and the boy of black. And what has the boy
of white chosen? He has chosen God and charity, it seems. The other one has chosen evil,
murder, crime. They seem to be in opposition. Not at all! They form a pair. And here we have
a stroke of genius on Bresson’s part, which is to have transformed all this into a screenplay
that gives it a concrete intensity. And here we see that we are not at all in the domain of
psychology, because it is not a psychological story. The boy of white, the devotee, is really a
devotee who has the following idea: that in order to attain true devotion and to give alms one
must necessarily begin by becoming an informer. One must begin by stealing and by giving
false testimony.

What does all this mean? It means… it forms part of a domain where we find ourselves
stepping into the greatest mysteries. Why does the boy of white think this? The boy of white
thinks the way he does… Well, let's focus on this way of thinking and we’ll see if we can
draw something from it. So, it's quite a strange situation because the boy of white, the boy of
divine charity, begins where the boy of black ends. And what’s more, the boy of white has
made theft and false testimony the condition of his practicing charity, whereas this very act of
denunciation – actually both the theft and the false testimony – it is this very false testimony
that the boy of white makes against the boy of black, who wasn’t yet black but becomes so on
account of the testimony, that then precipitates him into crime. In other words, the boy of
white and the boy of black are like two sides of the same coin, but what is it exactly?
According to Bresson, it’s the two sides of the same filth, which is money itself. Neither of
them chooses. Neither one nor the other chooses. We don't choose for evil, but then again,
we’ve more or less understood why we couldn't choose for good. Because the good is
precisely the instance that tells me: you have no choice for reasons which are metaphysical,
namely, you cannot hide from God.

But, but, but… why can't we choose for evil? Why can't we choose for evil? Well, yes, we
can choose for evil. Yes, yes, Bresson says so. And here is someone who said it even better.
Yes, you can choose for evil, but not for long. You can choose for evil only once. The choice
for evil – this is his formula, his motto – is “once and for all”. You can choose for evil once,
not twice. Why? The commissioner in Pickpocket says it in the plainest form which is that of
common sense: "You can't stop". The man of black cannot stop. This is what common sense
would call a fatal slope. Well, it’s a bit plain to say you can't stop.

                                                                                                      6

But when it’s Mephisto himself who says it in Goethe, it already becomes less plain. Finally,
it no longer comes to us from common sense but from someone who knows what he is
talking about, that is, from the devil. And in Goethe, in Goethe's Faust, Mephisto enters
Faust's house. He enters through the window… No, it’s through the door, yes, through the
door. It's a splendid, splendid scene!13 He enters through the door. And the conversation
between him and Faust soon turns bitter, and he says: “Let me go back.” And Faustus says,
“But what's stopping you?” And he answers: “Well, it’s that you made the sign of God, the
pentagram, on the landing, and the point is facing the way I'd like to go out the door, so I
can't go out through the door”, and Faust answers: “Well, since you are so clever, you can go
out through the window or by the roof, or whatever”. And Mephisto says to him: “No, no, I
have to go out the way I came in, I have to go out the way I came in. I came in through the
door so I have to go out through the door.” “Why?” says Faust. And Mephisto's sublime
answer is: “We demons or spectres”, in modern translation “we demons or vampires, we
demons or vampires, we are free for the first act, but we are already slaves for the second”14.
Well, it's already less plain here. The spirit of evil is free for the first act but is already a slave
for the second. Which means that he doesn't really choose. He can't really choose.

Well, let's continue. Why do I say that he can't really choose? Someone who chooses once
and for all doesn't really choose. Well, if he chooses once and for all, it's because he thought
he was choosing only once. He thought he was choosing for the first time, and the second
time, he realizes that, not only can he no longer choose but that he had never chosen in the
first place. And indeed, Mephisto has not chosen. So, let's leave this aside for now because
it's still obscure. Why does the man of black...? What I’m trying to say is not yet clear
enough, it's not yet sufficiently rigorous, since we are literally floundering.

And then, fourthly, there is, I suppose, the man of true choice. Why isn’t the man of black
able to choose in the end, even though he thought he was choosing? It is because he chose the
situation such that, once he had chosen it, he could no longer choose. But then who would the
man of true choice be? So maybe we'll move forward, then we'll take a definitive step. We
are on the edge of reason. A step into the unreasonable? Namely that the man of the true
choice is the one who chooses for every time. What does this mean? It means that he chooses
in such conditions that he will never stop making this choice again without altering it. Indeed,
since there is only one choice. As we have seen, the only choice is whether one chooses or
not. The man of true choice is the one who chooses to choose. Well, this choice of choice,
will necessarily be something he makes for every time. That is to say, it is a choice that will
never cease to recommence at every moment. We are forced. I mean, we are already forced to
say this, wherever it leads us.

If it is true that the man of black could only wager on evil on the condition of making a false
choice, that is, of choosing once and not being able to choose afterwards, this imposes upon
us the idea that the man of true choice – who you understand should not at all be confused
with the man of good, the man of white – the man of true choice is the one who chooses in
such conditions that this choice is not once and for all, but all for one. That is to say, a choice
that will never cease to recommence, a wager that will never stop putting itself into play by
re-wagering. So, in Bresson, but perhaps also the others, we already have four elements in
our alternation. The character of white, the character of black, the character of grey and the
luminous character, which is the name we could give to the character of true choice.

And then there is a fifth, a fifth, which is very useful, and this is the beast, and the finest of
the beasts, the ass. Why? Because the ass is the creature of non-choice. Why? It’s not at all

                                                                                                       7

like the others with their false choices. It is the creature that is not in a state to choose. It is
not in nature… I mean, it is not in a state to choose. But why is it not in a state to choose?
Because... What is the ass’s situation? The ass’s situation is that it is not in a state to choose,
because it is fundamentally in a state and in a situation where it can only undergo the
consequences of man's non-choices and choices. In other words, the ass, the poor ass,
receives from events only the part that is accomplished on their borders that is damaging to
them. It is in a situation where it receives and never ceases to receive the effect of people's
non-choices or choices, especially the effect of people's non-choices, and this will be the
ass’s torture. It will be all the blows with which it is afflicted. It will be the ass as the
preferred victim of humanity, that is, as the preferred victim of the man of white, the man of
black and the man of gray. But no doubt for the same reason, it will be the object of a
preferential union for the man of choice, the luminous man, which is to say Christ. Hmmm...

Let me repeat… Yes, we could speak of the pathetic situation of the ass. The ass is pathos.
Pathetic situation of the ass: it is not free. Its situation is therefore not a question of choosing
or not choosing. In any case, it is unable to choose. But it is still clearly part of the list, it is
clearly part of the list, because by not being in the situation to choose, it is in the animal
situation of undergoing the effect of people's non-choices or of people's eventual choices.
And suffering all the effects of humanity's non-choices or false choices – the choice for evil,
the choice for the whiteness of the devout – it will be charged with all sins by the devotee, it
will be the preferred victim of the man of evil, a scapegoat, a creature that can easily be
tortured, and so on. So it will be the preferential victim of man. And, in this sense, it receives
– it is because of this that the ass is like the entire world – what it receives from all events…
what it receives is an echo of all events. It gathers in its body the part of events that come to
be actualized, and which comes to wound this body. There isn’t a single event that doesn’t
end with the ass being beaten with a stick.

You understand what this means, that we are all asses. Obviously, you’ve understood this, but
at the same time as being the preferential victim of man, whether it be the man of white, the
man of gray or the man of black, it will also form the preferential union of the luminous man,
that is, the man of choice, which is to say, since... We've been revolving around this since the
beginning, which is to say Christ, who is the man of choice. Is that okay? Are you okay with
that? Well, now we're beginning to make some headway.

Let's go back to Pascal. What is our whole history? All this filiation of thought, all this line of
thought that I'm trying to trace here, to tighten up as much as I can, all of this preferential
line, I'd say… I mean, the whole of this line of thought, we can present as moving from
alternation to alternative. Only they’re not at all the same, alternation and alternative. It
requires both. It requires alternation as a basis, and then it requires the alternative as an act. In
both respects, it is the opposite of expressionism or even of dialectics, because dialectics
required the opposition of black and white as the basis of its opposition, while its act,
considered as an act of thought, would be the struggle of light with darkness.

Well, I can't oppose more... I can't make a harder duality than that, or a more solid duality
than that. Whereas for the others, it's not at all the same. For them, it’s no easy matter but
there is no struggle. If you read Kierkegaard, Pascal, Péguy and so on, you can see that it's
not their domain. I don’t even think that they really understand what it means to struggle. It's
not a fight. For them, what counts is, on the one hand, as a basis, the alternation of white,
gray and eventually… I mean of white and black, and eventually of gray. So, they don't at all
conceive white and black as… [Interruption of the recording] [46:47]

                                                                                                8

 ... they will create space like that, in the form of rhythmic or geometric alternation. These are
alternations. In my view, you will be hard put to find, either in Bresson or in Dreyer, the
slightest opposition between darkness and light, it is not their problem. This is very clear, for
example, in one of Bresson’s films where he pushes rhythmic alternations the furthest,
namely The Diary of a Country Priest15. What we have are alternations, a series of
alternations. Well, and in the same way I would say that the act of thought in relation to this
alternation will be the alternative, provided that we don’t confuse it… It’s not at all a
question of struggle. There would be no struggle at all, in the sense of a struggle of the spirit
against darkness. What there will be is an alternative.

Well, well, an alternative, but what do we mean by that? We've seen it. So, I'll tell you the
story in a nutshell, shuffling everything together. Whether it's Pascal, whether it's
Kierkegaard, whether it's Sartre or whether it's Péguy – we'll see later – and in cinematic
terms, it’s strange, whether it's Dreyer who descends from Kierkegaard, or whether it's
Bresson who I suppose descends from Pascal, there’s a question that tortures me: Why is it
that there has never been an atheistic cinema? What is this profound link between Christianity
and cinema? How can we manage to make atheistic images? Godard almost managed, his
work partly revolved around that question, but nobody is spared from faith. Well, finally you
can feel that... that... that, you feel that... well, I don't know what to feel.

So, I would say this is the situation. You have your alternations. In a way, you have put
things in order as if you were Pascal. And understand that putting things in order is already
difficult. And then you'd wish to say: Well, there you have it, either white or black or gray.
Well, no, that’s not how it is! Or you could say: There are two either/ors. There is an either/or
of alternation and there is an either/or of alternative. There, you've put matters in order, put
your terms in order. And again, I can also say… First box, “God exists” … it's like at the
casino. First box, “God exists”. Second box, “God doesn't exist”. Third box, “Maybe he does,
maybe he doesn’t”. That's the alternation.

What we saw last time was that these thinkers of whom I speak were breaking away. Given
that they needed that as a base, they were actually making a leap. This base was a
springboard, and they were leaping. Why? They took the leap because they were leaving
behind the alternation of terms for something else altogether: the alternative of the modes of
existence supposed by those terms. Beneath the alternation of terms, it was necessary for
them to discover the alternative of the modes of existence, in order to finally know what these
terms concerned. And what would the alternative of the modes of existence, that they would
discover as a kind of jumping on the spot, consist in exactly? They would tell us, they would
all tell us that in any case it was a question of choosing: You are involved and whatever you
do, you choose. That’s what the leap was. You see, they had the alternation of terms and they
leapt up and down, telling us: You know that whatever you do, you choose, you're involved.

But then again there are choices you can only make if you say: I don't have a choice. There
are choices that you can only make if you deny that there is a choice. And what are these
choices you can only make on condition of denying that there is a choice? Strictly speaking,
all the terms have an alternation, all of them! With no exceptions! The “God exists” of the
devotee, the devotee can only say “God exists” on the condition that he has no choice, so it
collapses. The “Maybe yes, maybe not” of uncertainty collapses too, being a non-choice. And
the choice “God does not exist”, that of the man of evil, collapses even more, because it is the
worst of the non-choices. He thought that it was enough to choose for the first act. This is the

                                                                                                   9

worst misunderstanding regarding choice. But choice exists only insofar as it is renewed at
every moment. Of all the non-choices, that of the man of black, the man of evil is the worst.

So, when I leap from my base into the air, into the question we are now confronting, what do
I discover? That all the terms I've placed in alternation are false terms, that is, if I relate them
to modes of existence, they are modes of existence that, as the man said, are perfectly
inauthentic. And we called these inauthentic modes of existence Sartre's bad faith, Pascal's
diversion, Kierkegaard's aesthetic stage, which is to say all those choices that can only be
made on the condition of saying that there is no choice.

But then if I annul all… all my alternations, my whole series of alternations, if I cancel all
that, what happens then? Well, I could only discover these false choices within the true
choice that I was in the process of discovering at the same time. Namely, I discovered that
they weren’t actually about choosing. I annulled all my alternations, all the successive terms
of my alternation in saying: yes, these are choices that I could only make on condition of
denying that I have a choice. And from then on, what is it that emerges, splendid, luminous?
There is only one choice I can make, affirming that I have choice – and this is the authentic
mode of existence – I need only choose choice itself, because if I choose choice, I can no
longer choose anything I formerly chose on the condition of denying that I had a choice.
Okay!

So much so that the man of faith is asked only one thing, and God asks only one thing of him,
the God who is not the God of the devout, but who is the “living God”, what Pascal will call
the living God, meaning the one with whom the man of faith has a private relationship. Well,
this living God with whom the man of faith, what Kierkegaard will call the knight of faith,
with whom the knight of faith has a living relationship, this relationship and this God himself
are strictly inseparable from the choice I make when I choose God… No, not at all when I
choose God, because this always a false choice – but from the choice I make when I choose
the mode of existence I can only choose in knowing that I have the choice. And it is only in
this mode of existence that I choose knowing that I have a choice, that I can enter into an
unheard-of relationship with the living God, and that I become the knight of faith.

Which is to say… Well, what is it that occurs in the true choice? You see how I literally took
a leap, I leapt from the alternation of terms to the alternative of modes of existence, and I
don't have to choose between modes of existence, since there is only one that I can choose
knowing that I have the choice. All the others I could only choose by never having the
choice. All this is very odd... this question… it's very interesting indeed!

Except that we demand a little more because then this real choice, we understand, but we
don't understand anything anymore, because this choice is one I obviously make – I don't
need to explain why, it's obvious simply because that’s the way it is – I make it through
sacrifice. Indeed, I have sacrificed all the terms of the alternations. I have sacrificed
everything. I have not only sacrificed diversion, which would be nothing, but I have
sacrificed even my most sincere loves. In the case of Kierkegaard, I sacrificed Regine. I have
even sacrificed my own life. So sometimes I survive, sometimes I die. This is the choice, in a
way, it’s the choice of Joan of Arc. I say the choice of Joan of Arc because I’m thinking
about cinema. She haunts Dreyer… Joan does, she haunts both Dreyer and Bresson. As for
Kierkegaard, since he is a reformist, we should not be surprised that he’s not much interested
in Joan of Arc. No, but it's the same thing. His main concern is Abraham. Abraham's sacrifice

                                                                                                10

is no less important than Joan's sacrifice. There is always a matter of sacrifice involved in
this.

What does this mean? The moment I choose choice, that is, the moment I choose a choice
such that I am able to make in knowing that I am choosing, the moment I have risen to the
choice of choice, whether I die or not, it is for every time. And whether I die or not – this is
where things will become extremely mysterious – everything is restored to me. No doubt
because I have renounced everything, all the terms of the alternation, in favor of the only real
choice, which was the choice of choosing. So, I renounced all the terms, and now, when I
have made and continue to make the choice of choosing, everything is restored to me.
Everything is restored to me. Well, here’s the mystery, everything is restored to me in the
mode of faith.

So, everything is restored to me in the mode of faith… everything is restored to me in the
mode of faith, what does this mean? This is the direction Kierkegaard goes in, which was
only indicated by Pascal. I believe that there are texts that indicate it quite well in Pascal. It
will be a truly Kierkegaardian contribution, this idea of things being “restored”, that is to say
what he will call “repetition”. And this will be taken up again, although here – someone who
never read Kierkegaard, and he couldn't have known his work, I think… if he had known
him… he might have known him, but I don’t think it’s very likely that he was familiar with
his work – I mean even in someone like Péguy, everything is restored. Good!

It's… it's the character of Isaac [Deleuze here means Abraham] who chose the true choice. He
entered into, he entered into a private relationship with God. And the true choice is indeed the
choice of choice, which is the private relationship with God. It is the Pascalian wager that is
opposed to the devout, that is opposed to the God of the devout. In this case, as Kierkegaard
is always saying, it is the God of Job and Abraham. But there’s worse to come for us. It's that
for the first time, already with Pascal and then with Kierkegaard and then with a man, a great
follower of this line, this time a Russian – it took a Russian orthodox to complete matters –
namely Shestov16, the opposition of two types of thought, the public professor and the
private thinker, will arise. But what had already emerged fully with Kierkegaard was that the
man of true choice was the private thinker. The others, the devout, the man of evil, all of
them, all those assistants of the false choice, were public professors, professors of virtues or
vices, it amounts to the same thing. And here we will have the great attack on public
professors, public professors who, for Kierkegaard, were obviously represented above all by
Hegel and dialectics. And this will be Shestov’s great opposition, which already emerges
fully in Kierkegaard, between Athens and Jerusalem.17

The private thinker is Job or Abraham, the one who enters into a private relationship with
God, such that in choosing to choose, he will receive everything twofold. So, the choice that
recommences without end, that never ceases to recommence – even if I die from the choice –
but this choice is that I have made not once for all time but every time for one. So, it doesn't
matter if I die because of it, since everything will be restored to me in dying or in surviving
beyond the white death. Everything will be restored to Joan of Arc just as everything will be
restored to Christ just as everything was already restored to Job, everything, and finally,
everything in the moment Isaac [Deleuze again means Abraham], in his idea of madness, in
his private relationship with God, chooses to immolate Isaac, his much loved son for whom
he had waited so long when he had him at the age of ninety.

                                                                                                11

And he gets up one morning, and this is what I was telling you, the great opposition that
Kierkegaard makes between Agamemnon, the man of white, the Greek man, and the man
from Jerusalem, Abraham. Agamemnon says: “I sacrifice my Iphigenia, she is the one I loved
the most, I loved her more than anything else, but there is duty to consider, there is the
fatherland, there is the nation, there is...” – I can think of many modern Agamemnons –
“there's all that, there's war, there's war, the winds must be favorable”. And Iphigenia cries,
cries, cries. But does Agamemnon cry? No, he does not cry because he is a leader and a
leader should not cry, and he tells her: “My tears are all in my heart, my daughter, we have no
choice.” And again, the whole of Greece applauds, and what is merrier still is that all the
Greek girls say: “Bravo, bravo!” Good.

But in the case of Isaac, nothing of the sort takes place. One day Abraham says to Isaac: “Get
up! Come! We're going to make a sacrifice!” And Isaac says: “Yes, but where is the beast?” –
that is, where is the ass, if you like. And Abraham replies: “God will provide”. This “God
will provide” is disturbing. Isaac trots behind Abraham and Isaac… no, Abraham, chooses to
sacrifice Isaac. Why does he do this? Because he is in the private relation of the wager – what
Kierkegaard for his part calls the alternative – he is in the private relation of the wager and no
longer in the theological relation with the God of “there is no choice”, such that by choosing
to sacrifice his son, Abraham makes a choice for the absurd. He wagers on the absurd. And
now, Abraham will have everything restored to him. The choice that chooses itself as a
choice, and that chooses itself in recommencing, will, in relation to this choice, have
everything restored.

Does this mean... well… does this mean Regine will be restored to Kierkegaard who had
abandoned her? Kierkegaard was unable to be a knight of faith, something which bothered
him a lot. He said: “I do all I can, but I will never be a knight of faith. What I can at least be
is a poet of faith.” And indeed, after all, the only knight of faith, you might say, for these
thinkers is Christ. There is nothing wrong with being simply a poet of faith, it is already
something. So they will be, they will be poets of faith. And Kierkegaard had his alternations,
which were a bit like Proust's alternations with his young girls. “Regine, shall I marry
Regine?” He would wake up every morning, he would wake up asking: “So do I marry
Regine? Do I give Regine her freedom? If I don't marry her, will I do something even worse
in seducing her only in order to abandon her...” Because Kierkegaard had a pretty shady past
in this sense. So, it gnawed at him, it gnawed at him a bit like what happened at the
Liberation. Should I join the Communist Party? There are people who lived the period of the
Liberation like that, and it seems there were even some after May '68…18

And the choice he makes, the choice he makes is to give up everything, therefore to abandon
Regine all the more since he also gives her up… he gives up Regine. And so on...

[To a student] Yes, just a minute, I’m sure you have something to say about all this. The
alternation, the whole alternation finally, Regine or not Regine and so forth. He chooses, he
chooses. He enters into a private relationship with God, at least in the form of a poetry of
faith. And everything will be restored to him. What does this mean? In the meantime, since
he took his time in deciding all this, Regine had already married someone else. But she is
restored to him. In what form is she restored to him? In what way? Is she restored to him in
spirit? No! You can sense… the way all these authors are pursued by a fundamental problem
which is that of incarnation. You can't say that it restores ... it doesn't restore what they have
lost. What they have lost is not restored to them through the wager, or in the form of
resignation or acceptance. No! These people are in no way resigned. It is not restored to them

                                                                                                  12

simply in spirit, and yet neither is it restored to them in the flesh. So, what is going on here?
It's what they call the mystery of repetition. What do we gain from this? What do we gain?
What we gain is that everything is restored to us. So, what does this mean? Let's attempt…
we are still mired in the aesthetic stage, you see we are not yet at the stage of... of faith, even
poetic faith. So, I say to myself, here we are, let's hypothesize a bit and see if we can go even
further.

You see my two levels: alternation and alternative. Once again, you have taken as your base
support the alternation of terms. You took the leap and you discovered the alternative, and
moreover in discovering the alternative, everything is restored to you in terms of alternation.
What does it mean to say that everything is restored to me in terms of alternation? I can only
think in terms of light. At the first level of alternation, what was it that alternated? White,
insofar as it imprisoned light, cellular white, the white of the cell or clinic. That terrible
white! And black, insofar as wherever there is black, light ceases. You see that this isn’t the
dialectical or expressionist idea of a combat. It is simply the cessation of light. Come on, let's
turn it off... [Interruption of the recording] [1:13:18]

Part 2

The gray was uncertainty, it was the half-tone. There were the two pure tones and then the
half-tone, the in-between hours, dawn or dusk, light arising, light going out, this was the third
term of my alternation. I rise to the alternative, to the choice of choice, that is, I discover a
choice that breaks with all the terms of the alternation, which is to say I’ve chosen the light.
Only the light can be the choice of choice. The light is the only thing I can choose, knowing
that it is a question of choosing.

Third moment: as soon as I have made this choice and made it again, since I can only make
this choice by making it again at each moment, even in death, as soon as I have made this
choice, everything is restored to me. What does it mean to say “everything is restored to me”?
All the terms of the alternation. Fine, but in what form? I say everything is restored to me, so
let's take this literally, let’s allow ourselves to be led: white is restored to me just as black is
restored to me just as grey is restored to me, but obviously in another form. And yet, it will be
a physical form, which is why I cannot be satisfied with an answer such as: it is restored to
me in spirit. But it's no longer the same type of physics. Because what will be restored to me
is a form of white. Is this a miracle or not? At the point we are now, it could well be a
miracle. It is a white that no longer imprisons light. It is a white that is no longer the prison of
light, and it is a black that is no longer the cessation of light, and it is an in-between that is no
longer uncertainty or hesitation.

You see, we're making a little bit of headway now because... well, yes, well yes, we can see a
little bit better. This white is bountiful, the black is bountiful, and how bountiful is the gray!
It is clear that they contained other powers. The white could be something other than a cell of
light. Just as black could surely be something other than a cessation of light, and the inbetween could well be something other than the midst of my uncertainty. So, what would it
be? What is restored to me are whites, blacks and grays that are like the powers of
luminosity, the powers of light. What I have lost is Regine, but this was a Regine of
alternation; what is restored to me is a Regine of the alternative, that is, a luminous Regine.
Well, but I want to touch her and I can't touch this luminous Regine, yet she is once again...

                                                                                                13

So, what kind of touch are we talking about now? What kind of touch are we talking about?
For the moment, we can't go any further.

They discovered that thought, even before being knowledge – and this is the great discovery
of this whole German lineage – even before being knowledge, thought had a deeper ground
and this deeper ground was called “belief”. And however strange the origin of all this may be,
I believe it was with Kant... and yet, and yet... because it was Kant who had discovered that
in thought there was something deeper than knowledge, which was belief, and that all
knowledge presupposed belief. Well, but how? What path did it have to take? What a strange
appearance this Kantian discovery would have… Everything is restored to us, this is the
mystery, once again, either of faith or of repetition, white, black and gray as powers of light.
You see? Whereas in the alternation of the terms, it was once again white that imprisoned
light and black that marked its cessation.

Now, if you are sensitive to this, it seems to me, if you are at all sensitive to this question,
independently of the problem of faith, you will understand there is already an aesthetic
translation taking place. If you think of Dreyer's cinema, well, this is exactly what I just told
you about, it's the world of Dreyer's great trilogy. The three women. I put aside Joan of Arc
for whom it is obvious, but the three women who rise to the choice and to the consciousness
of their choice, to choice and to the consciousness of choice, and from then on, either in death
or beyond death – we even have these three cases: one dies, one is “resurrected” and one isn’t
even required to die. And so we have the woman of Ordet, the woman of Day of Wrath and
the woman of Gertrud19. And Dreyer's great trilogy presents precisely, and at the level of
images, at the level of art, absolutely, this passage from alternation, from the alternation of
blacks, grays and whites, to the alternative as a firm – to the letter – as a firm spiritual
decision, the choice of choice that recommences at every moment. And at that point it is
Gertrud who accedes to this choice. Everything is restored to her, beginning with what she
had lost that was most precious, namely herself. Everything is restored to her, that is to say
above all herself, and so she teaches us, just as Pascal said, that in the matter of the wager, the
wager concerns ourselves. Just as Péguy would say in another manner. The same thing is true
for Bresson’s A Man Escaped, or for his country priest. So, we stumble upon this, we stumble
upon this, well... What happens? What happens? We cannot simply say, as I said before, we
can’t just say well, this is where faith begins. Now that we’ve waded into this, we have to try
to find a way out of it.

So, I say to myself, even if we accumulate these authors, there is one that we haven’t yet
looked at and who interests me a lot because he is so… he is very interesting, and this is
Péguy. Perhaps from Péguy we might get a glimmer, another glimmer… It's very odd, this
business… and then you can sense that – as we have said about many, since this has
happened more than once – in order to finish, I need to address Péguy because he will allow
us, in a quite pedagogical sense, to go back to Bergson. For Péguy claims to be and proclaims
himself a disciple of Bergson. And Bergson was very fond of Péguy, I believe, though he
found him an odd disciple... very odd. It's not so much the Christianity that bothers Bergson –
although, at that time… Bergson was Jewish, you know, and at the end of his life it appears
that he had the intention of converting. But at the end of his life there was the Occupation, so
obviously he did not convert because he wished to remain in solidarity with the Jews, and he
wanted to wear the yellow star. So, conversion was out. However, all the declarations
Bergson made towards the end of his life indicated a desire to convert. But in any case, his
would not have been the same kind of Christianity as Péguy’s. And we'll see, we will try to

                                                                                                 14

understand how Péguy could have believed himself to be a Bergsonian, and this amounts to
the same problem.

What I would like to note is that for me Péguy... and this is why I would say that the problem
of faith and that of aesthetics are inseparable. What is Péguy for us? As soon as we open any
book of his, unless we have a particular vocation for faith, we see that he is above all a
remarkable stylist, and it is this stylist who speaks to you in a way where you find yourself
saying: well, I have never heard anything like that anywhere before, I have never heard that
anywhere, and it’s because he has made a style of repetition. And notice that repetition is a
theme common to this whole lineage. But the fact is that the others... Kierkegaard said, contra
Hegel, who employed large oppositions, he said: I'm going to propose an equally interesting
concept, a very Danish concept, he said it was a very Danish concept, which was a way to...
well, it was a concept that came from his part of the world, since he was Danish, and so he
said, I bring you the concept of repetition. But he didn't make a style out of it.

Open any page of Péguy and one might speak of a litany because he does employ litany, but
it wouldn’t be sufficient because what he does is something else entirely. He invents
something so grandiose that, in my view, Péguy's style is, if you like, akin to that of the
great… I mean, the great mad prose stylists. I would say that it's as important, and just as
radical and innovative, as Joyce's language and style. It’s something very, very peculiar, and
yet the rules seem quite simple. I'd like to read you some but just a little sample, because I'd
rather you discovered him for yourselves. You take any text of Péguy's and then... I will read
you a few short passages that will give you a feel of the power of repetition in this style.

Suppose you adopt this rule: you set down part of a first sentence, then you complete it. You
will complete it by introducing new words which might be adverbs. But each time you
introduce a new word you start the sentence again, taking into account the rhythmic values –
for example there could be inversions, variations, grammatical variations, and what you will
have will literally be… taken together Péguy's sentences will be like a wave, not just any
wave, but a wave that carries small pebbles with it. Each time, the sentence starts again, the
sentence recommences from zero, a new word is added, then another new word, and each
time it will be the whole sentence that starts over again. It is not within the sentence that he
adds words, as if one crossed out a sentence one had just written to make it more perfect, and
it is not that the previous sentence was imperfect either. What he gives the style is, if you
like, something that will be the equivalent… something that is quite literally like the rhythm
of a walk. It's a way of walking, you see, and each time, each step takes up the whole
sentence again by adding a little something. Kierkegaard's sentences, as far as one can judge
– which is difficult because he wrote in Danish – but according to the translations, it's not...
his constant theme is the idea of taking leaps. It's not the same kind of walk. And then Péguy
piles it on, he’s constantly telling us: I am a peasant, I am a peasant, so obviously, it's a
peasant kind of walk, you know.20

But what is he telling us here? What is he... Well, you'll recognize right away, you'll
recognize our problem and the point we’ve now reached. And he says: When you consider an
event – you remember, my whole theme is that there is an alternation and an alternative and
we must not confuse the domain of alternation and the domain of the alternative. Péguy
begins his history by saying: There are two cuts or there are two lines, there are two cuts or
there are two lines. This is how it goes: listen carefully to this first quotation which is taken, I
believe, from Victor Marie, Comte Hugo, a book that… – Péguy admired Hugo enormously –
it’s a very fine book on Hugo and on many other things too. “The entire universality of the

                                                                                                   15

horizontal cut of the present time is infinitely multiplied by the entire universality of the
sounding [coup de sonde]” – Let me continue for the moment – “The entire universality of
the horizontal cut of the present moment is infinitely multiplied by the entire universality of
the sounding.”

[Airplane noise overhead] Ah... it's the airbus, it's that stupid airbus, right? What’s that? It
can't be...

[A student]: It's a Mirage, I think!

Ok, I’ll start again: “The entire universality of the horizontal cut of the present time is
infinitely multiplied by the entire universality of the sounding, of its vertical deepening, by
the entire universality of this vertical cut” – you see how we realize that the word shouldn’t
be corrected – “by the entire universality of the sounding, by the universality of the vertical
cut, of the vertical deepening, by the universality of the vertical cut and of its elevation, of the
vertical thread” – cut, sounding, thread, each time we have to start again – “of the vertical
thread, by the entire universality of the vertical past which is vertically the richest, of a
vertical past that is infinite for each point of this horizontal universe…” – Yes, I got the
caesura wrong – “Vertically the richest…” – Sorry, I’ll start again, you will understand
everything – “The entire universality of the horizontal cut of the present time is infinitely
multiplied by the entire universality of the sounding, of the vertical deepening, by the entire
universality of the vertical cut and its elevation, of the vertical thread, by the entire
universality of the vertical past which is vertically the richest, of a vertical past that is infinite
for each point of this infinite horizontal universe of the present time”. Phew!

And I ask you, isn’t it the same thing? I'm not risking anything if I say, isn’t it the same thing
when, in one of his finest books, Clio, he tells us: “One can say that inscription and
recollection” – inscribe and recollect – “One can say that inscription and recollection are at
right angles, she says” – because here it is Clio who speaks, he finds it more amusing that
way – “One can say, she says, that inscription and recollection are…” – ah yes, there are two
she-says – “One can say, she-says” – damn, I'm getting lost... yes, “One can say, she says,
that inscription and recollection are... 21 [Interruption of the recording] [1:33:53]

…slides on a longitudinal groove along the event; history slides along parallel to the event.
Memory is perpendicular. Memory sinks and dives and probes into the event. History is this
brilliantly decorated, though slightly impotent general, who reviews the troops in full battle
regalia on the field of maneuvers in some garrison town. He passes along the lines. And its
inscription is some sergeant-major who follows the captain, or some garrison adjutant who
follows the general, and who notes down when a cross strap is missing. But memory, but
aging, she says, is the general on the battlefield, no longer passing along the lines, but on the
contrary (perpendicularly) within his lines, fixed, entrenched behind his lines, launching,
pushing forward his lines which stand there horizontal, crosswise before him. And behind a
hillock the guard stood massed.”22

This is quite obscure... what is he telling us? Let's try to make a schema, we're not thinking of
Bergson here… What time is it? Where is my chalk?... That's exactly what he's saying. I don't
need to start again. Oh, dear! [Deleuze draws the schema on the board] That doesn't look like
it, this is the horizontal line, you see, this is what he calls the cut, the horizontal cut. What do
you place on this horizontal cut? You place [Deleuze writes on the board] instants or – let's
not be too rigorous, we're in such a state – let's put presents, presents that follow one another,

                                                                                                16

a succession of presents… a succession of presents. From a to b, it's a horizontal cut, a
horizontal cut, but of what? If we knew that... Could we say that it is a horizontal cut of time?
We don't know, we don't know. I can only say that... I can establish two vectors, it seems to
me, from a I pass to b and this is what I would call – it's not in Péguy but that doesn't matter –
a “protention”.23 I go from a present to the new present. But I can also go from b to a, from
the new present, from the present present to the old present, which is what I would call a
“retention”. So, I keep the old present… [Deleuze continues to write on the blackboard] also
to make it a bit nicer, I'll alternate... you see, it's nicer like that... here, here is my cut.

And he tells us that there's something else, there's a vertical cut and a vertical sounding. I
don't yet know what the event is but, he tells us, there, on the horizontal line, you pass along
the event. You pass along the event, which means what? More than that, you walk along the
presents, you pass from one present to another. But at each of these instants a, b, c, d, let's
imagine that there is a vertical cut, right? This time, I plunge into the event. The event is the
halo of each present, the halo. H-A-L-O. It's what surrounds every present.

When I live, in my daily life, I never stop passing alongside events. I am like the general who
marches along the line of troops – as he has just said – a little impotent, because I am getting
more and more tired. Then I put things in order. I would say I put everything here for the
moment, this is the alternation... “Woman...” Damn! I was trying to quote by heart, but
obviously I’ve forgotten. "Woman… you would put away God himself..." You don't know
this poem? “Woman, I tell you, you would put away God himself if... if... if he ever came
down to set foot in your house” – Yes, it's something like that: “Woman, you would put away
God himself if he ever came down…”24 This line, sometimes he calls it… it would take a lot
of study to see why he calls it… it's the line of… it's the line of putting away, it's the line of
accumulation, only what I accumulate are diminishing values. And, we might add, this is the
line of money, the accumulation of diminishing value. He wrote a quite interesting book on
money which I don’t know if Bresson is familiar with…

So, we might as well say, if you followed me, that this is the line of alternation. Oh, look at
that! White, black, gray, exactly as I look at time, I pass along time, I open my windows. It is
white, it is black, it is gray. Call it what you will: line of aging, line of alternation, line of
money, line of… it's all the same. I pass along the event, or if you prefer, since it amounts to
the same thing, along events. One event follows another. Well, if you're at b… if I were
Pascal, I’d say it was the line of diversion. No sooner do I reach a than I say, "Oh, let’s make
haste to b," no sooner am I at b than I say, "Oh, when will we get to c?" Right. That…
[Deleuze points to the schema] that doesn't count, that cross there... it’s not a pattern.

Then, suppose that at a bend in the road, you're running alongside events, you see what an
odd conception this is. At a push, it's not the events that are moving, it's not the presents that
are moving, it's you running like crazy, it's you running like crazy along this line of the
present, so it's your own pauses that define the presents. Well, and then… mixing everything
together, if you allow me, I could say – though I haven't justified this yet – if one day you
decided to choose to choose, that is to say, to choose in knowing that it's a question of
choosing, you couldn't… you'd be literally expelled from this line. You would have made a
sounding, and the sounding is the path of the vertical line. You see how there is a common
point between the two lines: it is the path of the vertical line. It’s the sounding as he says, as
he says in the first text... now you can perhaps understand it better:

                                                                                                 17

“The universality of the horizontal cut of the present moment…” – that's it! [Deleuze
indicates on the board] – “is infinitely multiplied” – this is something we can't yet understand
– “is infinitely multiplied” – this will pose a problem – “is infinitely multiplied by the entire
universality of the sounding, of the vertical deepening” – I just commented on sounding and
vertical deepening – “by the entire universality of the vertical cut and the elevation of the
vertical thread” – all of this works – “the universality of the vertical past which is vertically
the richest” – I haven’t commented on this past – “of a vertical past” – not commented on –
“that is infinite for each of the points of this infinite horizontal universe of the present time” –
that I did comment on – “for each of the points of this infinite horizontal universe of the
present time” – I mean, for each of the points I had distinguished on the horizontal line.

Well, now, instead of passing along events, you're going to plunge into an event. If you've
ever plunged into an event... So maybe we have a hasty approximation of what the order of
faith is? Because if you have ever plunged into an event, literally speaking, you have never
come back from it. Perhaps everything will have been restored to you. So, I say to myself, I'm
beginning to understand – I don't understand much for the moment, but I would say that to
plunge into an event is no small matter. What does it mean to say that I plunge into an event?
And what does this idea consist in? In my view, I have no choice. Here I’m beginning to
make a bit of headway. You see, at a stretch, I could conceive of a relation from b to a, from
c to a, from d to a, no less than in the other direction, from a to b, from b to c, from c to d.
But what will happen here? We have to furbish this idea of “plunging into the density
(épaisseur) of an event” with something. If an event has a density, it must have points. Yes, it
has to have points.

Moreover, Péguy will make use of a word that, since I too happen to use it constantly, is a
further reason for me to feel happy – he will use the term singularity… singularity. On this
line, we have many singularities. “For in the density of an event”, he tells us – and this, once
again, gives him the opportunity to create a very fine stylistic effect – Oh, no… he doesn't say
singularity but it doesn't matter. I say it doesn’t matter because it amounts to the same thing,
so it’s of no importance, it doesn’t matter. He says it very eloquently in two splendid
passages in Clio:

“But is it not obvious that the event is not homogeneous, that perhaps it is organic, that there
are what in acoustics we call…” – this is his acoustic metaphor – “that there are what in
acoustics we call antinodes and nodes” – it is not only in acoustics, this also occurs in
mathematics in the theory of functions – “plenitudes and voids, a rhythm, perhaps a way of
regulating tensions and relaxations, periods and epochs, axes of vibration, points of uprising,
points of crisis.”

Another, even clearer passage: “By a crisis point… there are critical points of the event…
there are critical points of the event just as there are critical points of temperature, melting
points, freezing points, boiling points, points of condensation, points of coagulation and of
crystallization. And in the event there are even states of supercooling which will only
precipitate, which will only crystallize…” – You see, supercooling is what happens when a
physical state, the physical state of a body, has exceeded the threshold where normally it
should melt, and it is in a state of supercooling – “these states of supercooling which will
precipitate, which will crystallize, which are determined only thanks to the introduction of a
fragment of a future event.”25

                                                                                                    18

Great, we had to go all the way to the end. And it's only when he says the craziest thing of all
that we understand everything. I have no choice, I have no choice. If I plunge into c… if I
stay on the horizontal, in c I will have relations with b and a. But if I plunge into c, I can
wave all that goodbye because I plunge into the density of the event. And what shall I say
now? Let's start from d. If I keep to a temporal succession following the horizontal line, what
I have is a dotted line… [Deleuze writes on the board] Excellent! You have understood
everything, we have everything we need. We are saved. Faith has hit you.

You have an a´ there, so you don't have just an a. This a´… if I situate myself in the c
sounding this famous c, it will become a´´. Why will it become second? Because it is b that
occupies a that will have been transformed into a b´. There, if I situate myself in the c
sounding – here you should sense the emergence of a theory of time that will be of crucial
importance to us – then we have b´´. Why? Because I have a c´, and I have an a´´´. This line
is infinite, so what I can represent here is a ridiculously small part. The sounding of the event,
the vertical sounding, the vertical thread, will unite an instant c not to b and a, but to b´ and
a´´, while the instant b will unite… will conjugate not with c, b and a, but with c´, b´´ and
a´´´. Here I would say that my horizontal line consists in the connections, the connections of
the present time.

What is this? What we have are the conjunctions of an infinite past. Indeed, on my vertical
line, I don't find the old present, I find a b´, which is of a different nature to the old present
that I will call "of the past". Each sounding will grasp the totality of the past in the density of
the event. Each sounding will be a small m, which will include on its vertical line a´, b´´, c´´´,
d´´´´… and so on and so forth. At that moment, a in relation to b was only an old present,
whereas a´ in relation to b is a real past. Only it is a past that… what? It is a past that is
restored to you, that is restored to you in the vertical line or on the vertical line, in the density
of the event.

And you will be able to say of the horizontal line that it is time, it is time. Just as you can say
of the vertical lines that this is the eternal. But in fact, that’s not what it is, because the eternal
has become time. In what way? Indeed, what is important is the point of intersection. It is that
at each moment of the present, there is what he called this 90 degree encounter between the
vertical cut and the horizontal line.

On the horizontal line you have the succession of a, b, c, d… that is, the succession of
presents that pass. Remember this well because we are making some headway. This is the
succession of presents that pass. And on the vertical lines, what do we have? On the contrary,
we have contemporaneity, the coexistence of an instant with all the pasts, which are not just
old presents. The old present was a in relation to b, whereas what I call pasts would be a´,
a´´, a´´´, b´, b´´, b´´´. You plunge down, you don’t reascend the course of time. You plunge
into the event that restores to you within the event itself all you had lost on the first line. How
could such an author say to Bergson, "Don't you see that I am your disciple"? He has no
reason to.

And I might add: What does he do in the last sentence that is so amazing and that makes me
so happy? Well… “Sometimes there are in the event of these states of supercooling which
precipitate...” – in what he calls points of crystallization, boiling points etc. So here we have
my list of b´… no, I mean c´, b´´, a´´´. Everyone will define a critical point in my linesounding. And he adds, “Sometimes I require a fragment of the future event”. Indeed, why
shouldn't it also go in the direction… of what is still to come? What he is doing is to integrate

                                                                                                    19

the future – not at all in the form of predestination, since he is not saying that the future has
already been realized, it remains a future – but that doesn't prevent my soundings from
including fragments of future events that I myself, at that moment, would be incapable of
recognizing, making me say: “What's going on here?” And in a presentiment, I would say to
myself: Yes, this belongs to me, in a kind of “inverted reminiscence”, it belongs to me, but it
has not yet arrived.

So how can we say that he is Bergsonian? I would like to finish on this point because it is an
extremely difficult one. So, if this is faith… well, maybe this is what faith is? Can you
sense… what does it mean to say that everything is restored to us? In each sounding, well,
yes… c´, it's not c that will be given back to you, it's c´, b´´, a´´´, which is to say the powers.
I could even have said c2, b3, d I don't know what, a I don't know what... What we have are
elevations, potentialities, what is restored to you. These are potentialities.

And you will recall that last year and at the beginning of this year I was constantly reiterating
the following story: in the event, there are two things… in the event, there are two things,
there is the part of what is actualized in bodies. But there is also something else: there is a
part that exceeds all actualization, there is a part that exceeds its actualization. And yet it is
something real, it’s just that it isn’t actual. It’s real without being actual. It is, I said, the part
which is non-actualized, but which is, on the other hand, fully expressed, the event as
expressed and not as actualized. It will never be sufficient for me to actualize death in my
body, in a certain way I will have to express it, to express it in part. Which part? The part that
eludes accomplishment.26

And we find this conception of the event explicitly developed by Blanchot in his own
particular style,27 when he explicitly distinguishes between what can be actualized in the
event and this kind of potential – which is nevertheless perfectly real and which is not a
simple possibility – which has the potentiality of a power and which exceeds all actualization,
the part of the accomplished event that cannot itself be accomplished. Here, I believe – and I
think that Blanchot would perhaps recognize this, although I don't remember at all if he ever
wrote about Péguy – but it's clear that Péguy had an influence on Blanchot that comes
notably from the fact that Blanchot, in his youth, was an author and a thinker of faith, and the
influence of Péguy on Blanchot seems to me to be something… something completely
obvious...

Hidenobu Suzuki: He did write a text, there’s a text of his on Péguy...28

Deleuze: So, he wrote a text on Péguy. Well, he has everything you would need to understand
him and he has clearly retained something fundamental from this.

Now, you understand, here we find… on our part, I would say we find exactly these two
aspects of the event. Both are perfectly real. The part of the event that is actualized in states
of affairs, that is a, b, c, d. And the part of the event that is expressed as pure power or quality
and that can only be expressed, that is, the part of the event that eludes actualization. And in
Clio, what is... what is it that Péguy begin with? He begins with some splendid pages which
read more or less as follows: How could you imagine that in an event there is not something
that exceeds its actualization? For example, Homer writes the Iliad. An event is actualized,
fine. There must be something which exceeds its actualization, since we will never have done
with the Iliad, since there will always be a reader who will make a new actualization of the

                                                                                                20

Iliad. We must therefore believe that in the event, there is a reservoir of potentiality,
something that cannot be exhausted by its own actualization.

What's so Bergsonian about this? It is known that Bergson opposed duration to homogeneous
space, but that was for the basic readers of Bergson. For the great readers of Bergson – and
this is the kind of leap Péguy makes – it is within duration itself that we find the true
Bergsonian duality. And Bergsonian duration, according to Péguy, will be this point of
juncture between the horizontal cuts and the vertical soundings. And then he proposes an
image of Bergson that clearly no one before him had conceived of, with the exception of
Bergson himself in his own texts. In my view, he is the only person who understood Matter
and Memory at the time of its publication. He understood it, he re-translated it into his own
language, he remade it, yet the authenticity of his Bergsonism is clear. But why?

Hence the concept that to me seems so brilliant, at least the word Péguy invents, whose
brilliance must be noted. Each point of this junction of the two lines which constitutes the
true status of the duration… what will this be? It is what he will call the Aternal (internel).29
It will be the Aternal, that is, the junction between time and eternity. And there is never an
eternity independent of this junction. There isn’t the eternal and then time and then their
junction. There is only the Aternal, which is duration itself. And the Aternal is the presence of
the eternal in time, that is, the presence of the sounding on the horizontal line and the
presence of the horizontal line through the soundings.

So, is this what Bergson said? Yes, but he didn't push the schema far enough, because he was
in a hurry to make other schemas. And at the beginning of Chapter 3 of Matter and Memory
you find a text that seems extraordinary to me because... I have tried to make this schema
for… it isn’t actually in Péguy, I say this in all honesty. Péguy does not make a schema… it
was to try to... to be as clear as possible. In Matter and Memory, Chapter 3, you'll find a very
simple schema, which is charming, which explains everything, and which explains the point
where Péguy really anchored himself to Bergson. [Deleuze looks for the passage] Yes, but I
can no longer find it. Very simply, I want to show you that it is there, you see? Here it is.
Now, what is he telling us with this schema? Simply this... but it will get much more
complicated later. Two horizontal lines, a vertical line, a junction point, a, b and up at the top
c.30

This is what he tells us… what he tells us is still very odd. He says: it's very strange because
no one… I'm summarizing the text. You're there, you're in i. Well, a, b, i, it's… Let's call it –
I hope this will bring back memories – the plane of matter, it's the succession of pure
presents, it's the plane of matter. I am on this plane with my body, my body is in i, my body is
in i, you see? He says, it is nonetheless very strange. Everybody admits that the line a-b
extends outside my body, not only in what I see from a distance when I say, “Ah, I perceive
that, it’s over there, it’s not in my body but it’s over there!” But nobody is surprised that the
physical world continues beyond even what I can perceive. In other words, no one is
surprised that there are images that are not perceived. Since I remind you that for him… he
demonstrated that any movement of matter was an image, but never mind. Nobody is
surprised that it continues outside of my consciousness.

And now, by a strange perversion – but one that will be very important and this will be the
real perversion – in term of the vertical line, this is something I don't want, namely I don't
want the past or, if you prefer, I don't wish... I do wish for things to be extended beyond my
consciousness, on the horizontal line. But I don't wish for states to be extended beyond my

                                                                                                  21

consciousness on the vertical line. You'll tell me that Freud did want this, but let's not involve
him in this story. Besides, Matter and Memory was 1896 – we don't wish for states to be
extended... in what? On the vertical line of time, in the same way as things continue outside
of my consciousness on the horizontal line of matter. In other words, one wants space to
preserve and time, on the contrary, to dissipate. He says – and this is the great mystery – why
do people want this? How is it possible that people don’t realize that if they admit that objects
extend beyond my body and the perception I have of it, then also states must exist no less
beyond my body or outside of my consciousness and therefore beyond the images that I have
of them?

In other words, there is a pure memory – this is the memory Péguy speaks of – there is a pure
memory which constitutes an integral conservation, an integral conservation of all states, as
much as matter and space constitute a conservation of all the constituent objects of a
universe. And Bergson says he finds quite incomprehensible the attitude of people who wish
for things to be lost in time but preserved in space. There is no more difficulty, says Bergson,
in admitting that the past is preserved outside of me, than in admitting that an object exists
outside of me. Now, everyone finds it quite normal that an object exists outside of me.

You see, what he is doing here is constructing an extremely simple schema. And this will be
the idea that, in fact, there would be exactly what Péguy called the Aternal and that
Bergsonian duration is found neither there nor there… [Deleuze indicates the schema] but is
in fact the continual insertion of the vertical line in the horizontal line, and the continual
tracing of the horizontal line in relation to the vertical. It's the “passing alongside of”, at the
same time as the “plunging into”, the vertical sounding. That's what was needed. In other
words, here we have the two components of duration.

So, the schema I proposed… what does it accomplish? It accomplishes absolutely nothing
other than to complicate the Bergsonian schema, but it was already part of it. The Bergsonian
schema was already all this, since it is enough to shift i there… [Deleuze indicates the
schema] to move i along my line ab in order to obtain this very schema, and each of the
vertical lines, once again, will be between a point i and not points a, b, c, d, but points a´, c´,
b´´ and so on and so forth. And there you have the event, the event of the first line, the event
of the second line, the event of the second line, the event of the third line. And here you have
the event insofar as it is not exhausted by its accomplishment, and here instead you have the
event insofar as it accomplishes itself in actualizing the state of things.

Yes. So, there's only one problem remaining, which is how to justify this vertical line from
the point of view of time. What is this vertical line? What conception of time might it imply?
If we discover that, we will have discovered everything we needed. That is to say, you see
what I'm getting at… it is at this level that we will be able to encounter direct time-images, if
we manage to deepen this vertical line. But at least we have seen the extent to which Péguy, it
seems to me, had already grasped something of Bergson, something that is, that will be
completely irreplaceable.

I have the feeling I've forgotten something very, very... important but I can’t think what it is.
Too bad.

So you’ve had enough, eh? If you want, you can speak next time. That way you'll have had
time to reflect before you start speaking.

                                                                                                                  22

Student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: Yes, well, it's like you say. [Laughter] [End of the recording] [2:19:19]

Notes
  Charles Pierre Péguy (1873-1914) was a French poet, essayist and editor whose work, combining a frequently
uneasy mix of socialist and nationalist ideas, made him a hero to both right and left. He was killed in battle in
the early days of World War I. Among his most celebrated works are the long poem Le Porche du Mystère de la
Deuxième Vertu (The Portico of the Mystery of the Second Virtue), Clio. Dialogue de l'Histoire et de l'âme
païenne, L’argent and Eve.
  Variations of this scene are paraphrased both in the notes to The Movement-Image, where in the translation it is
mistakenly attributed to one of Kierkegaard’s early works, The Concept of Dread (which nonetheless contains a
lengthy discussion on being “educated by possibility”) and in What Is Philosophy? In actual fact, the episode,
which Deleuze envisages here almost as if it were a scene in an Ibsen play, is reported in a somewhat less
dramatic mode by Kierkegaard in The Sickness unto Death: “When someone faints, we call for water, eau de
Cologne, smelling salts; but when someone wants to despair, then the word is: Get possibility, get possibility,
possibility is the only salvation. A possibility – then the person in despair breathes again, he revives again, for
without possibility a person seems unable to breathe”.
  Kierkegaard’s idea of the knight of faith or the knight of the infinite is most fully discussed in Fear and
Trembling but also appears in Either/Or.
  Kierkegaard muses on the probable bourgeois guise of the knight of faith, and thus his unrecognizability, in a
passage in Fear and Trembling: “As I said before, I have not found anyone like that; meanwhile, I may very
well imagine him. Here he is. The acquaintance is made, I am introduced to him. The instant I first lay eyes on
him, I set him apart at once; I jump back, clap my hands, and say half aloud, ‘Good Lord, is this the man, is this
really the one – he looks just like a tax collector!’ But this is indeed the one. I move a little closer to him, watch
his slightest movement to see if it reveals a bit of heterogeneous optical telegraphy from the infinite, a glance, a
facial expression, a gesture, a sadness, a smile that would betray the infinite in its heterogeneity with the finite.
No! I examine his figure from top to toe to see if there may not be a crack through which the infinite would
peek. No! He is solid all the way through. His stance? It is vigorous, belongs entirely to finitude; no spruced-up
burgher walking out to Fresberg on a Sunday afternoon treads the earth more solidly. He belongs entirely to the
world; no bourgeois philistine could belong to it more. Nothing is detectable of that distant and aristocratic
nature by which the knight of the infinite is recognized.” See Søren Kierkegaard, Fear and
Trembling/Repetition, (Trans. Howard V. Hong & Edna H. Hong), Princeton: Princeton UP, 1983, pp. 38-39.
  Stages on Life’s Way quoted in The Movement-Image. “In Stages on Life’s Way (Trans. Walter Laurie, 1940),
it is the story of the accountant who goes mad for one hour a day, and seeks a law which could capitalise and fix
resemblance: one day he was in a brothel, but retains no memory of what happened there, it is the possibility
which makes him mad”.
  Here Deleuze is no doubt specifically referring to Day of Wrath (1943) where the paving effect is achieved
through the insistent play of white collars and hats against jet black cloaks.
  The Trial of Joan of Arc (Orig. Le procès de Jeanne d’Arc, 1962) is a film by Robert Bresson starring Florence
Delay as Joan. The screenplay is drawn from the transcripts of Joan’s actual trial and initial rehabilitation.
Bresson, it should be noted, was not a great enthusiast of Dreyer’s much acclaimed Passion.
  A Man Escaped or: The Wind Bloweth Where It Listeth (Orig. Un condamné à mort s'est échappé ou Le vent
souffle où il veut, 1956) is a film by Robert Bresson based on the memoirs of André Devigny, a member of the
French Resistance held in Montluc prison by the occupying Germans during World War II. The film follows the
arduous and meticulous efforts of Fontaine, a prisoner of war (played by Francois Letterier), to escape his
confinement.
  Pickpocket (1959) is a film by Robert Bresson starring Martin LaSalle and Marika Green. It was Bresson’s
first original screenplay and centres on an occasional thief who falls in with a group of professional
pickpocketers.
   Lancelot du Lac (1974) is a film by Robert Bresson inspired by the medieval romances of Chrétien de Troyes
and others around the figure of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table at Camelot. Featuring unknown
actors in the key roles (including the painter Luc Simon and the future film producer Humbert Balsan), it retells
the story of Lancelot’s doomed courtly romance with Queen Guinevere as the order of Camelot, stricken by
internal rivalries, crumbles.
   Les dames du Bois de Boulogne (1945) is Robert Bresson’s second film. In part a modern adaptation of
Diderot’s Jacques le fataliste, it stars Maria Casares, Elina Labourdette, Paul Bernard and Lucienne Bogaert.

                                                                                                                   23

   L’argent (1983) was Bresson’s last film. Loosely inspired by the first part of Leo Tolstoy’s 1911 novella The
False Coupon, the story concerns how the lives of two men, Yvon (an electrical worker) and Lucien (the
assistant in a photography shop) become intertwined in the wake of a false banknote being used to pay for a
picture frame. By bearing false witness when Yvon is wrongly accused of the fraud, Lucien becomes
responsible for Yvon’s descent into a life of crime but his attempts to repair the damage by helping Yvon escape
from prison lead implacably to tragedy.
   See Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust I & II, (Ed. And Trans. Stuart Atkins), Princeton: Princeton UP, Part
I, Lines 1385-1412.
   In the Atkins translation Mephistopheles’ reply is as follows: “For demons and for spectres there’s a rule:
where they’ve got in is where they must go out. The former’s up to us, the latter’s not in our control.”
   See Session 21 of the Cinema 2 seminar, note 24.
   Lev Isaakovich Shestov (1866-1938) was a Russian existentialist and religious philosopher, best known for
his critiques of both philosophic rationalism and scientism. His works include studies on Dostoyevsky,
Nietzsche and Kierkegaard.
   See Lev Shestov, Athens and Jerusalem, (Trans. Bernard Martin) Athens, Ohio UP, 1966. In the foreword
Shestov writes: “The task which I have set for myself in this book, Athens and Jerusalem, consists in putting to
proof the pretensions to the possession of truth which human reason or speculative philosophy make.
Knowledge is not here recognized as the supreme goal of man. Knowledge does not justify being; on the
contrary, it is from being that it must obtain its justification. Man wishes to think in the categories in which he
lives, and not to live in the categories in which he has become accustomed to think: the tree of knowledge no
longer chokes the tree of life.”
   See L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze, “G comme Gauche”, where Deleuze explains why he didn't join the
Communist Party.
   Gertrud (1964) was Dreyer’s last film. Based on the 1906 play of the same name by Hjalmar Söderberg, it
stars Nina Pens Rode in the title role as a woman who goes through several relations with different men (an
arrogant poet, her ambitious politician husband and a philandering young pianist), each of whom turn out to be
disappointing in different ways but none of whom are able to blunt the absolute faith in and capacity for love
that sustains her throughout her life.
   On style in Péguy, see also L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze, “S for Style”. An interesting comparison can be
made between Deleuze’s description here of Péguy’s style and that offered by André Gide: “Péguy’s style is like
that of very ancient litanies. It is like Arab chants, like the monotonous chants of heath and moor; it is
comparable to the desert; a desert of esparto, a desert of sand, a desert of stone… Péguy’s style is like the
pebbles of the desert which follow and resemble each other so closely, one so much like the other, but yet a tiny
bit different; and with a difference which corrects itself, recovers possession of itself, repeats itself, seems to
repeat itself, stresses itself, and always more clearly.” See Andre Gide, Nouveaux Pretextes: Réflexions sur
quelques points de littérature et de morale, Paris: Mercure de France, 1918.
   Though the tape is interrupted at this point, here is the whole of the passage Deleuze quotes from: “One can
say”, she says, “that inscription and recollection are... at right angles”, she says, “that they are inclined at ninety
degrees with respect to one another. History is essentially longitudinal, memory essentially vertical. History
essentially consists of passing along the event. Being inside the event, memory essentially and above all consists
of not leaving it, staying in it and going back through it from within. Memory and history form a right angle.
History is parallel to the event, memory is central and axial to it. History slides, so to speak, on a longitudinal
groove…” See also The Time-Image, p.297 note 3.
   See Charles Péguy, Clio, Oeuvres Complètes, Paris: Gallimard, NRF, 1916, Volume IV, pp. 285-286.
   The term “protention” comes from Husserl who theorizes it in relation to memory: “Every memory contains
expectation-intentions whose fulfilment leads to the present. Every process that constitutes its object originally
is animated by protentions that emptily constitute what is coming as coming, that catch it and bring it toward
fulfilment. However, the recollective process does not merely renew these protentions memorially. They are not
only there in the process of catching what is coming; they have also caught it. They have been fulfilled, and we
are conscious of this in the recollection”. See E. Husserl, On the Phenomenology of The Consciousness of
Internal Time, (Trans. John Barnett Brough), Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer Academic, 1991, p. 54.
   See Charles Péguy, Ève, in Oeuvres de Poésie 1873-1914, Paris: Gallimard, NRF, 1925.
   See Clio, op. cit. p. 269. Deleuze comments on this passage and the previous one in session 4 of the seminar
Cinema 2, and on these axes and the event see The Time Image, p. 297, note 3.
   On actualization, see session 4 of the Cinema 2 seminar, December 7, 1982.
   See session 4 of the Cinema 2 seminar, December 7, 1982.
   In his essay, “The Solitude of Péguy”, Maurice Blanchot speaks of the way Péguy is haunted by
presentiments of an unrealised future, noting for example how shortly before his death he referred to himself in
the third person and in the past tense: “In one of his last writings, L'Argent suite [Money, continued], in the

                                                                                                                24

course of a long examination of sin and grace, he suddenly used the following phrase: ‘That is what Péguy said
when he said that by the creation of the freedom of man...’ What does this verb in the past tense mean, this
mysterious intervention of an already impersonal Péguy? One might say that having all his life gotten ahead of
duration, he had finally crossed the line of time and now, close to the end, he is obliged to look backward to see
himself, perceiving the man that he still is in the form of a past that no longer exists.” See Maurice Blanchot,
Faux Pas, (Trans. Charlotte Mandell), Stanford: Stanford UP, pp. 279-283.
   On the Aternel, see session 4 of the same seminar, and also What Is Philosophy? pp. 111- 113.
   Deleuze reproduces this schema by Bergson in The Time-Image, p. 297, note 3.