Gilles Deleuze

On Cinema, Truth and Time: The Falsifier, 1983-1984

20th session - May 29, 1984 (Seminar 64)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Guadalupe Deza (Part 1), Magalí Bilbao Cuestas
(Part 2), Suellen Muniz / Revision: Nadia Ouis (Part 3); additional revisions to
transcription and time stamping, Charles J. Stivale

Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1

I come back to the practical exercise we were doing… a practical exercise that I would even
like to stretch out, extend. I mean, what we are doing… is not our essential subject, but we
can take advantage of what we are doing here to ask ourselves an additional, methodological
question that would concern – and this is what I would like to extend – that would concern
the relation, the possible relationships – but these relationships are to be constructed, because
they don’t pre-exist – the possible relationships there can be between philosophy, science,
literature, and also art.

If I try to define as vaguely as possible – that is, in terms of purely nominal definitions – art,
philosophy and science, I would say that science is a system of operators, and it would be up
to me – if that was our subject – to define these operators. But I’ll I just call them operators,
even if we don't know what these operators are, though you understand, they have a much
greater extension than, for example, the five mathematical operators. In mathematics, anyone
can give a content to this term. In the most elementary mathematics, we give a content to the
meaning of the notion of operator. But to draw a definition, an adequate determination of a
science, one must be able to explain in what way there are physical operators and chemical
operators, and what the differences are between mathematical operators, physical operators
and chemical operators.

But at the point we have reached, since what interested us was the crystal… the way
crystallography speaks to us about the crystal is, in fact, a scientific notion that concerns
physico-chemical operators. I would say that the role of philosophy, and the problems it deals
with, is not to reflect on science, nor to compose the history of science. If that’s what it was,
it would be a disaster. Once again, scientific scholars are sufficient for this, as they think very
well about science. But that is not philosophy’s concern. The role of philosophy, the field of
philosophy, is to compose a systematics of concepts, and by systematics I mean the art of
inventing, discovering and creating concepts. If this was my subject, it would be up to me to
show that a philosophical concept, as a philosophical figure, is something very different from
the operator as a scientific figure. Science is devoid of any concept, that is not its concern.
So, what I would like to say here is that if I were to talk about the relationship between
philosophy and science, I would need to develop this further.1

If I were to attempt in the same rudimentary fashion to pose the question: what is art? And
also: what is literature? I would start from a similarly basic definition. And I would say that,
in spite of the objections that immediately come to us, art is the activity that consists in
discovering, creating, inventing characters. And this notion of character seems fundamental
to me. To this, one might immediately say: yes, but nonetheless, we shouldn’t exaggerate.
The notion of character works at best only for the most superficial novels, or for the most
superficial theater plays. So we cannot really define literature, and even more so art, in terms
of this notion of character. But we shall see. We should really make an analysis of this third
figure, the character.

I suppose one might raise the following objection: you want to define art through the figure
of the character, but it isn’t clear this works in the case of music. To which we would say,
well, at first glance, it's true it’s not clear as regards music. But you have to look more
closely. It goes without saying that in opera, there are characters. Of course, opera is not
music. At least it’s not the whole of music. But I think, for example, of a little text by
Debussy on Wagner, an interesting text where he says oh, Wagner’s leitmotivs are something
that annoys me – this is what Debussy himself says. Because musically speaking, they are
exactly like signs. They are signs. They are like signs that mark the appearance on stage of a
character: the Wagnerian leitmotif. It's a way of saying… it's not that Debussy was wrong, it
simply means that he wasn’t interested in using Wagner's procedures. But anyone who loves
Wagner knows that the leitmotif is something much more than just a sign to mark the
appearance and reappearance of the same character.

What is the leitmotif? I would say, for example, that it is a rhythmic theme that has become a
character in itself. Olivier Messiaen, trying to define something which for him is essential in
music at the level of rhythmic values, tells us that the musical act, or one aspect of the
musical act consists in the fact that rhythms are no longer attached to characters; it is they
themselves who form characters, and they constitute a very important musical figure, which
he himself refers to as a “rhythmic character”. It’s in this sense that we might be led to
consider the figure of the character as no longer purely attached to the usual sense we give to
characters, although we would also keep this ordinary meaning, but as something that should
be extended in a sense perhaps be more appropriate to painting, independently of the question
of whether it is figurative or not. In painting, we might speak of colors becoming characters.
There are rhythmic values in painting where the rhythms themselves function as characters.

So, let’s suppose that this is the case. I am confronted with scientific operators… in culture,
throughout culture, I find myself confronted with scientific operators, with artistic figures,
and with philosophical concepts. In my view there is no reason why there shouldn’t be a rich
current of exchanges among them, provided that it is never conceived in an applied sense. It
is not a question of applying something from one field to another. Everyone knows that if you
take a scientific operator and apply it to philosophy, it only leads to disasters. But there are
also – how can I put it? – translations, or transductions, that would lead from a scientific
operator to a philosophical concept, and vice versa. And vice versa.

I would say, for example, that there is no point in applying the Bergsonian concept of time, or
duration, to science, since this would be an operation that would make no scientific sense, yet
it can inspire new scientific operators. I would even say that philosophical concepts can
inspire literary or artistic characters. Conversely, under what conditions can a relationship
between literature and philosophy exist? Can we extract a philosophical concept from a
character, or from a type of character, for example in a novel? That would be a way to

establish a kind of relationship where different disciplines could work together, each in its
specific role, without one being a reflection on the other.

And so, if today I’m adding literature, it's because I'd like to talk about it a little bit in terms
of the problem we are faced with. Because our task didn't fall from the sky, it continues from
everything we’ve done so far. We reached a point where we were trying to form a
philosophical concept: the crystal-image. A philosophical concept... On top of that we added
the history of cinema and so on. Okay. We thought that cinema would perhaps offer us
applications, or direct transductions of this. But we still had to form our concept of the
crystal-image. And so we began to call science to our aid by asking ourselves, in terms of a
fairly open field of research that could vary considerably and where each of us could pursue
their own path. So now we should make a table of... This is why I'm not asking you to learn
from science since, for most of us it's too late anyway. But you don't have to learn it in order
to make use of it. You don't even have to understand it in order to make use of it.

We all know so little about crystallography… so my first question was: well, what can we
draw from crystallography? That is to say, what character could we extract that would work
with – – that would work with a possible philosophical concept? We didn't ask anything
more. Perhaps, then, we can now turn to the other side and ask: What in literature, what
character, what mode of narration, would allow us to extract, to enrich… what could we draw
from literature that would be capable of nurturing or multiplying the characters of our
concept of the crystal-image? Do you see? If you understand that, I believe that you... it can
help you advance in your own research. So, this was the point we’d got to. Really, it's like a
kind of… it's not a game, it's a kind of research. Fine. So you, you and you… what can you
draw from crystallography?

So last time Jouanny had started to speak about something very interesting, and I think that if
he wants to finish, we can take up the question again, keeping in mind all you said the last
time. If it was a question of sketching, or trying to form, a concept of the crystal-image, a
philosophical concept, what would you draw from crystallography, even as a very separate
matter? We have operators in crystallography, fine. But which ones are we going to draw
upon in order to extract from them a conceptualizable character that, if need be, would even
be cause for much amusement among a society of crystallographers? It doesn't matter, it’s of
no importance, no importance at all. What science laughs at, philosophy takes seriously, and
vice versa, and vice versa. And with a vengeance, always with a vengeance. So...

Jouanny: To go back to the order of the different operators that we could use, the…
[indistinct words] for example, which you mentioned last time...

Deleuze: I would actually prefer to hear your own...

Jouanny: Mine? Well, precisely, I take back this one in particular because… [indistinct
words] it is richer… [indistinct words] We spoke about cinema since… [indistinct words] the
limpid and the opaque, and the stone, the quartz or crystal… [indistinct words] In any case…
[indistinct words] since we spoke a lot last time... and I believe that there are very interesting
things in this mechanism of the limpid and the opaque. Because it plays a lot on a certain
construction of this… that is to say the physical particularity which I had heard a lot about
last time… [indistinct words] And it's very interesting to see how diamond dealers talk, or
people in general, the way they talk about stones. For them… the way they regard them as
individuals with their own character, their clarity, their... way of being alive.

Deleuze: No, individual is better, they are individuals...

Jouanny: They are all different from each other, they all have a rich particularity, they all
have flaws that sometimes give them a very interesting quality of… [indistinct words] which
makes them less commercial. So this is… [indistinct words]

Deleuze: This aspect of individuation is good, because it’s something I had dropped, you see?
So, it's very, very good... Yes, it's very good... So, you would retain the individuation aspect.

Jouanny: It's very interesting because when you talk to someone… [indistinct words] At least
for them, they really feel like they've met people with an interior richness… [indistinct
words]. And even regarding the exterior, it's the same. They feel capable of something, they
are very proud of what they have done and very happy. They can't stop talking about the
reflection of such and such a stone that they have managed to find, how… [indistinct words]
perception, how they are going to manage to use it, by what trick, what mirror effect, what
facet effect they are going to manage to magnify or increase the… [indistinct words] of
stones. All this… [indistinct words] of the operators.

Deleuze : Yes, yes, yes…

Jouanny: [indistinct words] Especially when we started talking about the color of stones.
Because at the beginning, well, I thought that the color of stones was relatively defined, that
obviously diamond… [indistinct words] had blue minerals, ruby had red minerals, emerald
had green minerals, whereas we’ve seen, on the contrary, that the diamonds that have the
most interesting… [indistinct words] blue color… [indistinct words] red color… [indistinct
words] yellow color, because we can get much more interesting mirror reflections from them.
Diffracting the light of each color is more interesting because if the light was white you could
make the… [indistinct word] that was red or yellow pass through, you often get very
interesting reflections, especially with diamonds… [indistinct words] for the opaque,
precisely… [indistinct words]

As for rubies and emeralds, there are rubies and emeralds that can be crystallized from two
different colors. That is, a ruby can be both… It will change color according to the light it
reflects, and this is exciting for diamond dealers. And for certain qualities of emeralds, we
have emeralds that can, quite frankly, be of two different qualities, of both green and blue.
We can have a sampling of colors that is very, very interesting because by cutting the stone
in… How shall I put it? We can have a sampling of colors that is very, very interesting
because by cutting the stone in… in crystalline, we manage to obtain effects of variation in
tone which may go from light green to a very dark blue. And for them this is obviously
something… [indistinct word] Then, they have a stone that they are particularly interested in,
it is the alexandrine, which has a power – it is a kind of emerald – which has the peculiarity
of being composed of three colors at the same time, and which can pass from an emerald
green color in sunlight, to a ruby red color in artificial light. And we can clearly see a whole
spectrum appearing through this stone. We really have something quite rare here, quite
difficult to find, something exceptional.

So, what interests them in particular are the effects of light that can be obtained from
different stones, in terms of changes in color. In any case, for rubies and emeralds, it is this
capacity to make use of a double constitution, a triple constitution of the crystal which, when
we look at it, gives different colors because precisely… [indistinct words] When light arrives,

we can have a mixture of a kind of white with a little yellow in it, with a kind of white which
veers towards green and a white that… [indistinct words]. So, we arrive at a mixture of colors
that is very interesting because since people have two eyes, they never see a stone from a just
one angle, and the effects that can be obtained from a stone multiply more and more…
[indistinct words]. But essentially, they are interested in… [indistinct words] of the stone, that
is to say there are no imperfections of the stone that could make it slightly… [indistinct
words].

On the other hand, the second quality… [indistinct words] of sapphire, that concerns other
stones as well, is that if it has some types of imperfection, that is to say when there are, inside
its structure, light metallic effects, light metallic atoms inside, thanks to this small peculiarity
of the stone we manage to obtain… [indistinct words]. It is because, it is interesting… it is
because it allows us to see… [indistinct words] It is quite big, and it manages to move on
different planes. That is to say, each of the different planes of the structure that we cannot see
with the naked eye and that we feel in the planning of the star form, takes off and moves on
the surface of the stone, it passes from plane to plane and causes an effect that we call
shooting star, several shooting stars that move inside the stone. So, in the same… [indistinct
word], there are two effects that interest us a lot. It's what we call polychromy, which
happens when a stone tries to be… [indistinct words] by several atoms of different colors, or
sometimes… [indistinct words] which is preferable, or slight metallic alterations, atoms
that… [indistinct words] and they can cause either… [indistinct words] effects, or effects like
cat's eyes, which is to say outright metallic… [indistinct words] that have developed inside
the stone, and develop straight, in a straight shape, and give the impression, when you look at
it, that an eye opens up, a bit like a cat's eye… [indistinct words] able to see inside… [several
indistinct phrases] And for them, indeed… [indistinct words] And this is when one
recognizes this… [indistinct words], that one recognizes the individual, each time through
accidents of crystallization which can be completely original.

So, speaking of diamonds, I want to go back to the problem of the opaque, because in stones
which are not very limpid, that are quite thick, where the material is not very translucent or
transparent… these stones can be cut very thin, very, very fine, so that one can still try to
obtain a slight transparency so we have the impression that light can pass through them. So,
when we are dealing with stones that are translucent, like diamonds, we always try to cut it so
that it is deep, and we obtain a black… [indistinct words] in the background. Or, in any case,
a thickness that can become opaque. Thus sometimes, dealing with extremely opaque stones,
we end up cutting them into hollows, obtaining a dark… [indistinct word] and on one side of
the stone a certain thinness. On the side where it’s thicker, we obtain a rather interesting
effect in terms of light. One can make it slightly translucent in the middle, while the sides
remain completely opaque. As for diamonds, it's completely the opposite, that is to say, it's
usually cut in the shape of a sliver, a bit like an arrow, and so you wouldn't look at the tip of
the arrow but you would look at its base. In this way, if you look at the cut stone from the
middle, you have the maximum depth at the bottom, and yet you can get a slight opaque
effect, which is multiplied by the fact that the facets on each side are… [indistinct words] on
both sides of the arrow, and the mirror effect reflects the light back to… [indistinct words]

Deleuze: That is useful in helping us draw a possible definition of a crystalline space.

Jouanny: [indistinct words] the shape of the crystal… [indistinct words] and it's a cone, if you
like, it's a cone so you could bring it to participate… [indistinct words] not the tip… and
these cones are going to be cut either into… [indistinct words] on the facets, or… [indistinct

words] The most talented diamond cutters try to make wafers that fit inside this cone so that
they obtain more brilliance on the surface… [indistinct words] and on which they try to…
[indistinct words] opacity in the center and a mirror effect on the sides. Something very
important to bear in mind is… [indistinct words] the size is actually the cone on the surface.
The cone on the surface contains a very small part that could be… [indistinct words] a square
that can be made on the surface, and we can cut it very slightly, obviously at a point that is a
very small cone which is tiny, but that we can still see with the eye in order to
reconcentrate… [indistinct words] It's interesting to see this play between the opaque and the
limpid, where the stones that are the most limpid and the most transparent can be worked in a
kind of opacity in order to… [indistinct word] the depth… [indistinct words] extremely
transparent and one can try to make them deeper, and thus the stones that are opaque can be
made… [indistinct words]

Deleuze: Yes, it's very clear. Yes.

Jouanny: So, these phenomena interested me… [indistinct words]. But there are a lot of ways
for diamond dealers to work, and to make diamonds of lesser quality they have rubies…
[indistinct words] Several diamonds of different qualities. However, what I didn't know was
that you can make… [indistinct words] you can mix crystals with each other. That is to say,
we can have a diamond which has a part which is limpid and a part which is… [indistinct
words] So, in this case, we would cut the diamond at a certain height, and between the two
places we would put… [words indistinct] another diamond that would be sealed in the
metallic attachment and not through the stone's embellishment. That would allow us, with
these two diamonds, to make one, in order to… [indistinct words]. Or one can even mix
emeralds with diamonds to obtain a kind of diamond emerald… [indistinct words] which can
be placed between two diamonds, usually right at the top of the cone… [indistinct words] and
can be replaced by a colored stone or a good quality diamond, even if this doesn’t have the
ideal clarity… [indistinct words] and so the other part is slightly… [indistinct word] There is
a whole gymnastics of light going on here… [indistinct words]

Deleuze: I'm very interested in all of this. It's perfect for us because, if we retain the essence
of what you just said, you can draw two axes from it: a light/color axis and a space axis.
That's good because I didn’t keep these in mind, I didn’t think of them. So this could be
added to... and when you defined this particular space, that we could call crystalline space, I
would say that regarding our concern, our specific concern about cinema, it seems to me like
an exact description, I'm not saying of space in general, but of certain spaces in the films of
Orson Welles, where you have a certain opacity in the centre and in the background… for
those of you who have seen one of Welles’ films where he plays a lot on crystalline colors…
The Immortal Story.2 I mean, it’s not a question of applying, you see… He just extracted two
characters... Fine. So, I would like to follow up on this but I don't know if, of course... He
drew out two axes, he identified two axes. As I was saying, I had three, I had three axes. But
that doesn't prevent... obviously, we'll now have to add the two he came up with.

So, you remember our starting point? Independently of these axes, our starting point was this:
a crystal-image is a two-sided image, or what we called, taking up a term of Gaston
Bachelard – but giving it another meaning – a mutual image. Indeed, for Bachelard, a mutual
image means an image that participates in several elements. According to him the crystalimage always participates in at least two elements: earth-air, earth-fire, earth-I don't know
what… and it is mutual, or bifacial.3

We ourselves said that a mutual image is the coalescence of an actual image and its virtual
image.4 And we relied on Bergson to be able to grasp this coalescence. But for us this also
corresponded to the phenomenon of paramnesia, that is to say the coexistence of an actual
image, of an image that is present, and its coexisting past. The coexistence of the present and
its own past is what Bergson presents as the recollection of the present, the coalescence of the
present and its recollection, the coalescence of the past with the present that it was. We must
add to this that according to Bergson the past does not come after the present but is strictly
contemporary with the present that it was. This gave us our starting point: the coalescence of
an actual image and its virtual image.

But that was only our starting point. In order to obtain a crystal-image, we said, it is not
enough simply to have this coalescence. It is necessary that this coalescence determines an
exchange: namely that the virtual image becomes actual and that the actual image becomes
virtual. In other words, the crystal is a circuit... [Tape interrupted] [31:57]

... occurs. Starting from the coalescence of an actual image and its virtual image, that is to say
its mirror image, the circuit is established as if by itself. The virtual image becomes actual,
the actual image becomes virtual. But in what way? The virtual image, namely the mirror
image, will become actual and will become all the more actual as the mirror multiplies its
facets – either through two facing mirrors, or through Venetian mirrors, or a multiplicity of
mirrors. So, to go back to what he just said… to what Jouanny just said regarding size: the
more the mirror multiplies its facets, the more the virtual image becomes actual, that is to say,
it captures the actual image to the point that the actual image becomes virtual. In what form?
The real character is no longer distinct from their mirror images. Not only are they no longer
distinct from their mirror images, but they have passed into the mirror images, yet at the same
time are repulsed by the mirror images to the point that the actual character is pushed out of
field and becomes virtual.

As I was saying, it seems to me that one of the greatest creators of crystal-images in cinema
is Orson Welles. Take for example the famous ending of The Lady from Shanghai. The
multiplication of mirrors has made the two characters, the man and the woman,
indistinguishable from their multiplied images. Each of them shoots into the mirrors until all
the mirrors are broken and the characters regain their actuality and realize that they were
standing side by side all the time, and so can finally shoot each other. So, they only recover
their actuality by killing each other. So here we have a circuit: actual image-virtual image. Do
you see? The virtual image becomes more and more actual as it absorbs and captures the
character, while the actual image becomes more and more virtual as the character is pushed
out of field, at least momentarily. He will only regain his actuality by breaking the mirror.
We have a circuit. This circuit I call crystal-image, and the famous ending of The Lady of
Shanghai is a prime example.

So this is my first axis. But we sense that this is not enough to found a concept of the mirrorimage. It would be too thin. It's already something, but it's too thin, so fortunately we can't
stop there. Because I am saying something simple here: the exchange will be renewed
according to a second axis, the exchange will be renewed according to a second axis.
Namely, if I were to summarize, I would say that the virtual image which has become actual
presents itself as limpid while the actual image that has become virtual passes into opacity. It
remains abstract for the moment, but it is a very comprehensible form of abstraction. You
see, it works... it's a second axis.

And at the same time, it renews the exchange. Why does it renew the exchange? I repeat,
since we can understand... To understand is to understand the abstract. While the concrete is
something else, you have to feel it. The virtual image that has become actual becomes limpid
at the same time as the actual image that has become virtual passes into opacity. But, but…
perhaps under the influence of certain factors, the limpid is called upon to become opaque,
and the opaque to become limpid. I would therefore have a second circuit: a circuit of the
limpid and the opaque that would form the second axis of the crystal-image and that would
follow the determination of the crystal-image as a mutual image, that is, as an image within
which an exchange takes place. For that is essentially what it is: a mutual image is an image
that is inseparable from an exchange.

Now, what I retain from crystallography, just as Jouanny drew out certain characters, is a
character that I present to you in the most rudimentary form possible. Listen, there's nothing
to understand. I take as an example a body like sulfur, a crystallizable body. Sulfur can
crystallize, crystallography tells us, you don't need to have studied to be able to grasp that.
Sulfur can crystallize in several forms, including two principal forms: a form called… – this
is self-explanatory, even if you don't know the meaning of the words, that's good, you can
also look it up in your dictionary later – it can crystallize either in a form they call
“octahedral” – you know what an octahedron is… you may know what it is, or you can look
it up in the Larousse – or in a form called “prismatic”.

Why am I delving into this? You see, under normal conditions – I emphasize, normal
conditions, but what do we mean by normal conditions? – under normal conditions,
octahedral sulfur, which has crystallized in octahedral form, octahedral sulfur is said to be
stable. And what does stable mean in this case? It means something very simple: it means
that the formation thus prepared remains limpid. Under these same conditions, prismatic
sulphur is metastable with respect to the octahedral. What does metastable mean here? Never
mind, you can look it up in your dictionary, but a good one… such as the Larousse, okay? It
means that such a preparation, after a certain time, becomes opaque. And why does it become
opaque? Because on its lattice, small octahedrons are formed which make it opaque, tiny
octahedrons which make it opaque.

I can therefore say that my two mutual crystalline forms – octahedral and prismatic – are
distributed, one being limpid, remaining limpid, while other becomes opaque in normal
conditions. Here, by normal conditions – and this will be of concern to me, obviously, this
will be of concern to me for the future – I refer to the conditions of the milieu. So, you see,
I've introduced the notion of milieu, and it comes as a surprise. We'll have to justify it,
especially in terms of the temperature of the milieu. Namely, what I have just described,
between the two crystalline forms of sulfur, one limpid and the other opaque, is valid for socalled ordinary temperatures, that is to say, if one wants to be scholarly about it, up to about
95 degrees. What happens above that? The following marvel occurs: it reverses. It's the
prismatic sulfur that is in stable equilibrium, and that remains limpid, while the octahedral
sulfur becomes opaque. Well, you can see that here I have my abstract circuit. I no longer
have an actual-virtual circuit, where the actual becomes virtual and the virtual becomes
actual. I have a limpid-opaque circuit where, depending on the conditions, the limpid
becomes opaque and the opaque becomes limpid. In what way does this second circuit follow
on from the first? We trust in the abstraction of the concept, and yes, it proceeds
automatically.

I repeat my initial formula: when the actual... No, sorry, when the virtual becomes actual, in
accordance with the first axis, there is limpidity. When the actual becomes virtual, it passes
into opacity. You see how here, just as happened before with the actual and the virtual, the
limpid and the opaque change places.

It's time to make all this concrete. But before I make it concrete, we have to make one last
effort. I introduced the idea of milieu. I'm not allowed to introduce it. Why did I introduce the
idea of milieu? I introduced it, invoking temperature conditions. Fortunately, to save
everything, we realize that the notion of milieu participates in a third axis: a third crystalline
axis, and that in the end there is no crystal. There are crystal-images, yes, but there is no
crystal. Why is that? Because the crystal itself is not a relation. That's why this is a mutual
image.

So, you will tell me yes, it is a relation between the actual and the virtual. And I will tell you,
Yes, but not only. As a relation, it is something else. As a relation, it is essentially something
else: it is the third axis. There is no crystal, there are only seeds and the milieu. And the
crystal is a pure limit between a seed said to be crystalline and a milieu said to be
crystallizable.

Can we say, then, that seed-milieu inevitably constitutes a third axis? Can we say that there is
a circuit there too? Yes, there is a circuit. For a very simple reason, it is the simple
continuation through the three axes. Because the actual and the virtual do not cease to change
places under different forms. Why is that? It's because I can also say, as for this last couple –
no longer actual-virtual, no longer limpid-opaque but seed-milieu – I can say, and I must say,
two things at once: the seed is the virtual element that causes an actual amorphous milieu to
crystallize.

What does amorphous mean here? You see how joyful this is. We travel in abstraction, but
it's a very, very vivid abstraction. There is no need to lay anything concrete underneath for
the moment. You have to trust that the concrete will follow. What does amorphous mean
here? We know, we saw it last time. The amorphous is that which does not have any
privileged direction. We recall that the crystal was defined, in the most general way, by
having a privileged direction. Thus, the amorphous is that which does not present a privileged
direction. I would say, in the operation of crystallization, the seed is a virtual element that
causes an actual amorphous milieu to crystallize.

As soon as I say that, I don't want to say the opposite occurs, but I want to talk about the
other half of the circuit. Namely, this amounts to saying that there must be a condition. For
the amorphous milieu to crystallize, what does it require? It must have a crystallizable
structure. And crystallography defines very well this potentiality of the crystallizable
structure. I would therefore say that the seed is the actual element that causes a matter, or a
milieu, that is actually amorphous to crystallize. I now say that the seed is the actual element
that causes a milieu to virtually crystallize. At the level of the seed and the milieu, the actual
and the virtual have changed places under or upon a third circuit. So now I have my three
circuits.

Now we could add a color circuit, and why not. Well, all this may feel like it doesn't mean
anything. It may not mean anything, but we cling to our concept. I would call the concept of
the crystal-image the determination of an image possessing three axes according to which the
actual becomes virtual and vice versa, the limpid becomes opaque and vice versa. So, we

have two exchanges. Plus, an exchange between seed and milieu also takes place. So here we
have the three developments of our starting definition: the coalescence of the actual and the
virtual. Okay? So, it will obviously become clearer if we look for concrete examples. The
concrete, as we saw in the case of the first axis, is not difficult. It was very clear, and if it is
not clear, I'll start again, right? So, since you don't want me to start again…

Second axis: what's going on? What is happening here? I would say, according to my first
axis, that the virtual image becomes actual. But in which case does it happen? We are
forgetting here the whole history of crystallography. We are forgetting... We think about
everyday things, alas, not yet. We will try to make a detour. We'll pay one last tribute to
science. Well, yes, the scientist… I mean, it's no longer about science, it's about the character
of the scientist. The scientist offers us a limpid image of himself. Because the scientist says to
us: what do I do if not pure science? I have nothing to hide, I am a man of science. We will
need Nietzsche to discover that, under the limpidity of the scientist, strange opacities are
hidden, opacities with which we have become very familiar. The scientist produces a limpid
image of himself, even when he is not specialized in crystallography. Good.

But this is the luminous scientist of official science. And we know that this limpid image can
arise only if there is another image that comes to the surface. The luminous scientist of
official science forms a kind of couple with a more obscure scientist who has renounced the
light of official or pure science, who confines himself to quite humble tasks in the darkness of
a small laboratory, and who no longer believes so much in pure science. What is this story? A
limpid image and an opaque image of science. Ah, yes… the luminous scientist of pure
science, the obscure scientist of the small hidden science.

There is a rather odd filmmaker, a Polish director, very odd, whose name is Krzysztof
Zanussi.5 He claims – and I tell you this can be verified – to have a scientific background, and
the fact is that most of his films feature two scientists who become characters. And there's
always a scientist with a bright future ahead of him who's involved in pure science, and who
goes to international symposiums which are places of light. And he has a former schoolmate
who was as brilliant as he was, but who has given up any luminous career, and works at
obscure little tasks, usually in meteorology.

And Zanussi is part of that Dreyer tradition… I mean, where sometimes you have science,
sometimes religion in Dreyer's case, sometimes faith, sometimes philosophy, as part of the
story and these become the subject of the most ordinary… what are literally the most banal
and everyday dialogues. This was Dreyer's incredible, incredible achievement. Zanussi too, in
terms of scientific discourse, gives us these two scientists who converse with one another,
and who explain themselves, and the more they explain themselves, the more the limpid
becomes opaque, and the more the opaque becomes suffused with a very strange light, a light
that is not so clear, because, is it the light of science or is it rather the light of something else
that would be closer to faith? And in a beautiful image, a beautiful case of the mutual image,
Zanussi creates a relation between a shot that representing a the luminously drawn human
brain lit up on a blackboard, which would be the scientific brain... [Tape interrupted] [59:06]

Part 2

... the limpid image, which he follows with an image of the opaque cranium of a monk at
prayer, seen from behind. You can see immediately what he is getting at. The film is called
The Illumination.6 Illumination is an Augustinian theme, from Saint Augustine. Zanussi, like

all Poles, is an Augustinian. So why… Serge Daney wrote what I think is a very good text on
the situation of cinema in Eastern European countries where he says that, after all, not
surprisingly it's not only Zanussi who proceeds in this way. Because in the end, writers and
film-makers are only allowed to criticize science. As for the other powers… the power of
science is something they can prod and attack. But the other powers, such as the political
power, are something they cannot criticize. So, indeed, they take it out on what they can.
Zanussi for example will criticize the power of science. Meaning that while you can criticize
Trofim Lysenko7, you can't criticize Stalin. Well, we'll let you criticize Lysenko, yes, we'll let
you criticize science.8

Hence, we have this very strange entity that is Zanussi's cinema, where all of history, then
science-faith, will be placed under the rubric – alas a Nietzschean one – In what way, we too,
are still pious…9 In what way are we too still pious? it is... here, when the limpid image of
science becomes opaque. Why does this happen? At the same time, Zanussi will show that
these scholars who claim to embody pure science, limpid science, are in fact animated by an
extremely dubious and opaque will to power and are conducting a business which, for sure, is
not clear. And at the same time, the opaque scientist, reduced to small obscure tasks, becomes
limpid and enjoys a strange light which is perhaps no longer that of science but that of
illumination. In what way are we still pious? The limpid has become opaque and the opaque
has become limpid. Or rather, is it like that? Not quite, not quite. There is always a measure
of uncertainty, uncertainty between the two, a kind of uncertainty principle. And who
ultimately depends on what? I'm introducing the third axis here, and we'll see that it depends
on the milieu.

And what is interesting in Zanussi's cinema are the exteriors, the milieu, the milieu that is
fundamentally a meteorological milieu, a meteorological milieu that is very related, snowy
landscapes, very, or liquid landscapes, that constantly risk tipping the limpid into the opaque
and the opaque into the limpid. And here, I don't know, I think I've already said this, there is
something, in fact, that is very striking in Eastern European cinema or in Soviet cinema, it's
that precisely because it's not based on movement-images like American cinema, they have
an extraordinary taste for materials.10 It is a cinema of materials, a cinema of heavy materials.
This they owe to Alexander Dovzhenko11, a great elder statesman of cinema. And, in general,
they will retain this Russian tradition of bringing heavy materials into cinema. The close-ups
in their films will not be close-ups of Greta Garbo. They will be close-ups of pumpkins – see
Dovzhenko – and pumpkins in the wet earth, heavy matter, dense still life compositions. This
never occurred in American cinema, because, for other reasons… because of its very virtues,
it went so far in pursuing the movement-image that materials could not follow. The taste for
materials, for heavy materials, if you think today of someone like Sergei Parajanov or Andrei
Tarkovsky, or Zanussi himself, who is Polish, this taste for heavy materials is the
characteristic of an image that does not regard movement as the essential element of the
image.

So okay... I'll leave it at that before making a transition to something else. In Zanussi's
cinema, if you have been following me, you could say that he presents us with scientists, but
what are these scientists? He makes them into actors. Yes, obviously, he makes them into
actors, he makes them dramatic beings par excellence. Now, the dramatic being par
excellence is the actor. And everything that seems unusual to us in Zanussi, in terms of these
men of science confronted in their limpid-obscure, limpid-opaque couple, with the opaque
becoming limpid and the limpid becoming opaque, would surprise us less if we were
informed that they are actors.

Why? What is the first face of the actor? The actor… let's try to construct a paradox of the
actor, which has nothing to do with Diderot's paradox…12 There are many possible
paradoxes. What is another paradox of the actor? You can sense that the actor's paradox is the
adventure of the limpid and the opaque. This will confirm what we are saying. Why? The
actor is attached to their role. Yes, the actor is attached to their role but what does this mean?
We romanticize, we dramatize things. The actor is a monster… well, it's not that the actor is a
monster, it is monsters who are actors. Monsters are born actors. Why? Because they are by
nature attached to their role. The actor is only attached to their role by will and by chance, but
the monster is attached to his role by nature and fate. Why? Because their role is made up of
their shortcomings or what they have in excess. The limbless man or the Siamese twin. You
should already understand what I’m getting at here, as far as cinema is concerned.13

Okay, but whether we’re speaking of a natural actor, that is to say the monster, or an
accidental actor, that is to say the actor by profession… what does it mean to be attached to
one's role? The role is the virtual image. Indeed, the role is a virtuality. The role is a
virtuality, the role is a virtual image. The actor is an actual character. The actor as an actual
character gives their actuality to the virtual image, that is to say to the role. They make the
role exist, or one may say they embody the role. To the extent that the actor is attached to
their role, they make the virtual image actual, and the virtual image of the role becomes
limpid. This is the clarity, the sublime clarity of art.

So, what Zanussi told us about the man of science was true, but it was much more true about
the actor, and it is more familiar and much more concrete to us when we’re speaking about
the actor. But what happens here? Now the actor has given all their actuality to the virtual
image of the role, and thus, the image of the role has become limpid. This is Hamlet in
person. From then on, the actor's actuality has gone elsewhere. The actor's actuality has
passed into the virtual, the virtual becoming actual and by the same token limpid, while the
actor's actuality as a person is pushed off-screen, it is pushed back, and falls back, into the
opaque. Behind the mask, that is to say, behind the role, is a dark and somber face. This has
been said a lot about clowns. Well, you can fill in the blanks yourself. The somber face
behind the clown's mask, is something whose actuality has passed into the opaque, and thus
has become virtual. At the same time that the virtual image of the role becomes actual, that is
to say limpid, the actuality of the actor becomes virtual and passes into the opaque.

Passes into the opaque? What do we mean by this? A dark and somber face behind the mask?
We are left with no choice, we are left with no choice. In terms of this other aspect, the actor
is a criminal. Under their private aspect, which is repressed by their public role and which
passes into the opaque, their private activity can only be that of a criminal. This is the actor’s
opacity, the criminal project that inspires them as a private person. And though this criminal
project may be of a very different nature, it doesn’t matter what it is, it will always be
criminal. It can be the project of a vigilante, it can be an act of revenge, it will always be a
criminal activity. But let's not overdo it. No, we must not exaggerate. It's the idea of the actor
that I'm talking about, it's not the actors themselves, right? It's the concept of the actor. I
would say that the concept of the actor is the mutual relationship between two images: the
limpid image, the image of the public role that has become limpid, and the image of a secret
and private criminal activity that has become opaque.

A great genius of cinema built his entire oeuvre on this theme and on this circuit. This is the
American filmmaker Tod Browning14, whose film Freaks15 is particularly well known in
France, but he made many other movies, as early as the silent era. He straddles the gap

between silent and talking films. And what can be found in all of Browning's work is a
reflection on the circus monster or the clown, on the circus artist, the circus actor who, for
him, condenses the essence of the actor. And what is the kind of story that Browning's films
recount? He is a truly great director because he brought to the screen this type of story, which
to my knowledge would have no equivalent in French except perhaps in the great 19th
century popular novels of Gaston Leroux16, to give one random example.

Freaks is particularly well known: the actors are the freaks, the monsters of the Barnum
circus. All their actuality passes into the virtual image of their role, they are attached to their
role and by this measure, becomes actual. The two Siamese twins, the limbless man, the… I,
I don’t mean to make fun of them, but also the adorable morons, the incredible duo of
morons, the hydrocephalic ones and so on, they all perform their roles in the full light of the
circus stage. And they are simultaneously led to undertake a private revenge, in the night
beneath flashes of lightning, when they will pursue the able-bodied woman who has despised
and deceived them, and they will converge towards her during the night, pursuing their
opaque, criminal activity of taking revenge, following which the normal woman will find
herself transformed into a monster more pitiable than themselves. You remember how
beautifully this is shown under the lightning… well for those who have seen the film.17

There are other Browning films that show how obsessed he was with this. One story, one of
the most beautiful of all stories happens in Freaks, where there is a fake limbless man who
really does have his arms cut off, that is, he makes his role limpid, he gives the role all of his
actuality by becoming a freak. He really does have his arms cut off for love, because he is in
love with a horsewoman who cannot bear the hands of men. Only in Gaston Leroux do we
find an equivalent of these proofs of love of a similarly high degree of poetry. To have one's
arms cut off because one is in love with a woman who cannot bear the hands of men, that is
to say, a cold horsewoman. What story could be more beautiful? But at the same time, as he
passes into the limpidity of limblessness, he somehow reconquers something of his actuality
by pursuing a private revenge, namely, in the attempt to assassinate his rival, since the
horsewoman has meanwhile allowed herself to be seduced by a man who has arms. It's one of
the most beautiful love stories in the world. Okay.

In another Browning film18, we have the ventriloquist Echo, who can only speak through the
mouth of his puppet... [Tape interrupted] [1:18:04]

… he pursues a criminal enterprise. Here he is disguised as a lady, he becomes a transvestite.
And the crime committed – opaque activity – this opaque activity will become limpid at the
moment the role is interrupted, when the role becomes again opaque and the opaque activity
bursts into the open. Because it is an innocent who is arrested and the criminal Echo is a good
man in the end, he will confess his crime through the mouth of the one who is unjustly
accused. Here once again, we have some splendid images. All of Browning's work turns
around this. It is not at all, as has sometimes been said, a reflection on the spectacle. It's a
circuit. There will be filmmakers who will make such a reflection… but Browning doesn’t do
this at all. What interests him is neither the theme of the theater nor the circus. What interests
him is the status of the actor and the relationship between the actor and the monster. And why
is he interested in the freak? He is interested in this transformation, this limpid-opaque,
opaque-limpid exchange. Not surprisingly, here we have a type of image that one can
recognize in advance, a completely stifling kind of atmosphere, an abnormal slowness as if
everything took place in a kind of glass cage, in a kind of... well, what else can be said.

Browning’s atmospheres have marked the history of cinema, and you will recognize them
immediately. So okay.

Is this enough for us? Immediately I say to myself, this is a theme that has continued
throughout time. There are two great films, two very interesting films that indirectly derive
from Browning: a film by Hitchcock called Murder19, and the film I mentioned earlier by
Kon Ichikawa, An Actor's Revenge.20 In both films we find the Browning pattern to the point
that – I can't believe that Browning didn't have an influence both on Hitchcock and on
Ichikawa – where the role, the crystalline role, the limpid role, passes into the opaque, that is
to say, into private revenge, into crime, at the same time as the opaque is discovered in broad
daylight and interrupts the role. And we have an opaque-limpid, limpid-opaque exchange.

Hitchcock's Murder is the story of a transvestite, and even more so Ichikawa's An Actor’s
Revenge also turns around the figure of a transvestite. Moreover, Ichikawa goes very far,
since he combines what at that time, it seems to me, was something very new, in terms of
European cinema at least. He combines landscapes with hermetic black backgrounds. There
are some splendid black backgrounds in An Actor’s Revenge that show very precisely the
succession of the limpid and the opaque and their exchange. And this becomes very refined,
that is to say that at the level of the technique used to produce the images you have this
limpid-opaque circuit.

So let's continue, let's keep our momentum. We can no longer... What is it that resembles a
circuit or I might say a ring, a circular track, what is it that resembles a ring? We had the
scientific amphitheatre with Zanussi, but the amphitheater ends up becoming a circus ring.
We have the stage or the circus ring as a place, a place where the genesis of the crystal-image
occurs. What could we add to this? There is no need… we can make the list as heteroclite as
we want as long as the coherence of this heteroclite list is guaranteed by the concept.

Perhaps there's a third thing that can function as a circuit. What would this be? It's a ship, a
ship. A ship is a crystal. That's odd, yet it seems so obvious to me. A ship is a crystal, do you
see? The ship is a crystal-image. Not necessarily, you might say. Even in cinema, there are
ships that are not necessarily crystal-images. Well, if there are ships that are not crystalimages, it is because they are not really ships. When they are real ships, then they are crystalimages. And this for the simple reason that the ship as ship is a crystal. You'll say, yes but
this is like saying... it's like we’re turning in circles.

Why is it a crystal? It doesn't look like one, yet those who know about ships also know that
they are crystals. I added something, those who know about ships… What do they know,
knowing about ships? They know something that the greatest painter of ships and boats
knew: splitting in two is not an accident that happens to the ship, although it is a catastrophic
accident. It is one of the powers of the ship: to split and sink is one of the powers of the ship.
Oh really! In fact, the greatest painter of ships is Turner21. Turner's favorite situation is – and
here we can talk about the crystal-image in painting – is a ship splitting in two from the
middle, as a result of a boiler explosion or a cannonball hit, a ship in flames that splits from
the middle. I’m not doing justice to the paintings… if I had to speak about the paintings
themselves, I would obviously draw something else from Turner, because what is interesting
is the following: what does he do with such a figurative situation, as far as painting is
concerned, that is to say, in terms of the regime of color and the regime of light? Turner is
undoubtedly one of the greatest colorists and perhaps the greatest painter of light in the whole
the history of painting. In any case, we cannot say that the ship splits by accident. The ship is

only realized in its essence as a ship by splitting in two, or by exploding. This is what Turner
makes us believe, this is what he offers us.

Well, it splits in two. Does this really help us? Yes, because it's clear that the ship has a
limpid side and an opaque side, and that being a ship means having a limpid side and an
opaque side, and that nothing can do this better than a ship. You will tell me, why not a
house? Why couldn't a house be a circus? A ship is a circus, that is to say a circuit. A house is
neither a circus nor a circuit. One can make a circuit in a house, of course one can. But at that
point, you’re treating it like a ship. Why does a ship have a limpid side and an opaque side?
Namely, why is a ship a crystal?

The greatest ship writer – parallel to the greatest painter of ships – the greatest writer about
ships is, as we all know, the American writer Hermann Melville. And Hermann Melville asks
this question, he never ceases to ask this question, in all of his work: what, in the end, is a
ship? It's not possible to write about ships after Melville. I mean, anyone who writes about
ships after Melville is a brazen writer. There are subjects that should be considered exhausted
once a genius has confronted them. So, yes, I say to myself that novelists who still talk about
ships are a lost cause.22

So, what does Melville tell us concerning what a ship really is? He says that a ship, well yes,
he says a ship may look like a house but it is not a house. Why isn't it a house?

“In the case of the ship there is this addition” – as opposed to the house – “that the living
spectacle it contains, upon its sudden and complete disclosure, has, in contrast with the blank
ocean which zones it” – allow me to comment as I go along – “in contrast with the blank
ocean” – here he is forced to introduce the idea of the milieu. It is in relation to a milieu, in
relation to the liquid milieu on which it sails, that the ship will reveal its strange crystalline
property.

In any case, let's continue. “The living spectacle it contains, upon its sudden and complete
disclosure, has, in contrast with the blank ocean which zones it, something of the effect of
enchantment.” – He doesn't speak as if he’s observing a ship from afar, does he? He's there,
he's lived on ships – “The ship seems unreal; these strange costumes, gestures, and faces, but
a shadowy tableau just emerged from the deep, which directly must receive back what it
gave.” 23 Is there a better expression for this than that the limpid becomes opaque? Why does
the limpid become opaque on a ship, “in contrast with the blank ocean”? But we are not able
to say what this means, this “in contrast with the blank ocean”, the empty ocean for which the
ship has a limpid face and an opaque face.

Indeed, in terms of one of its sides, everything on a ship must be visible, nothing must
escape, first of all because everything must be tidy as in a Japanese house. Everything must
be visible to the eye of the captain, and everything can be visible only to the extent that the
sailors coincide with their roles. It seems as if a real dramaturgy takes place on the ship, and
it is only to the extent that this limpid dramaturgy rises up on the boat, that the eye of the
captain sees everything, that everything is in order. The dramaturgy of departure. Of course,
things are no longer like that, there are no more sailing ships, but this is all about sailing
ships. Think about the captain's orders, this kind of pantomime in which the sailors indulge,
climbing the rigging and so on, all this, this, what is all a kind of real liturgy that ascends into
the limpid sky. This is what Melville will call the ship above decks and this is the limpid face
of the boat. The sailors are attached to their roles and pass into their roles. The virtual image

of the role becomes actual and presents itself as a limpid image. Phantasmagoria, a real
liturgy or dramaturgy, a phantasmagoria where everything is visible.

But the ship above decks, where everything is visible and limpid, is opposed to the black ship
below, the black ship below decks. So, according to its height, the two sides, there is what is
above the water and what lies under the water? Because what's down there? What's down
there is the settling of scores between the crewmen. It is the obscure violence of the crewmen,
the settling of scores between the sailors who go down into the hold to settle their accounts. It
is all the invisible and the opaque, and the two will not cease changing places. The settling of
accounts will be discovered and the roles interrupted, the limpid roles interrupted, and as the
opaque is discovered, it will become limpid. But, as the role is interrupted, the limpid will
slip into the opaque and a circuit will be formed of which Melville knows the secret, and
which you will find in Moby Dick. The limpid face of the ship is the whale hunt, where
everything is in order, everything is visible. On a whaler, everything must be in order, it's a
matter of life and death; not a single piece of rigging can be out of place, or a crewman could
be swept overboard. We're talking about old-time whaling, of course. Right. What about the
opaque ship? The opaque side is the dark madness of Captain Ahab, the dark madness of
Captain Ahab, who betrays the laws of whaling and leads his crew to their deaths.

So, in this great short story "Benito Cereno" there is the limpid side of the ship, the ship
above decks, with the Spanish captain who is assisted by a crew of black sailors who are
extremely attentive to him, and everything is moving, this kindness of the black sailors
towards their Spanish captain seems extremely touching. And to the American captain, who
has boarded the ship, and who sees this spectacle, it all seems strange to him, and yet
everything is visible. This is the limpid side. And it is only at the last moment that he will
discover the opaque side, that this drama is in fact a black comedy, and that these black
sailors, so kind to the Spanish captain, are in fact rebels who seized the ship, overwhelming
the crew – who slipped into the opaque side – and who all the time remained close to the
captain, but armed with knives – and this too is the opaque side – so that if the captain made
one wrong move, he would die and all the crew would die with him. The great short story
"Benito Cereno" shows you the circuit: limpid side of the ship-opaque side, opaque sidelimpid side, and here we have a circuit where the opaque becomes limpid and the limpid
opaque.

Well, whether or not this is an obsession of Melville’s, this play of the limpid and the opaque
on the ship, what it does is to make the ship into a crystal-image. But we are already on our
third axis, since this is not independent of the ship's situation. Alone on an immense sea, the
boat is like a seed about which we can ask ourselves: Will it manage to seed the sea or not?
And a recent film – I'm making a bit of a detour here, but it’s to try to be concrete – there’s a
recent, quite beautiful film by Fellini, And the Ship Sails On,24 that has taken on board
something of Melville's genius. For those of you who have seen And the Ship Sails On, you
will certainly remember that the ship keeps splitting, and that it even splits along three axes,
where each time the limpid and the opaque change places. I would say that And the Ship Sails
On is a typical case of a crystal-image film.

First axis: the ship above decks and the ship below decks, the dark side of the stokers and the
limpid side… of what? Of the drama that the passengers are supposed to play: they have
brought the ashes of a singer to scatter at a precise spot. And there is already an exchange
when the passengers go to see the stokers and the stokers coerce them to… the stokers coerce

them into have a singing contest in front of them. So here, something about the stokers
becomes limpid while the others slip into opacity, in what is a very, very beautiful scene.

The second axis of the ship’s splitting, this time on deck, no longer up and down but across,
not across, I don't know what, I can't find the word… yes, laterally, laterally. The boat takes
refugees on board, shipwrecked people, politically shipwrecked people. And on the deck,
ropes are set up so as to avoid mixing. The limpid side: the passengers; the opaque side: the
poor proletarian castaways. The opaque will become limpid and the limpid will become
opaque with the great moment of the dance where there is a mixing of passengers to a
Bartokian folk theme, and where the two groups mix and exchange their determinations.

Third axis: the dark warship arrives, the admirable warship constructed by Fellini that is
completely opaque, that has only small firing slits, tiny loopholes, and it claims the poor
shipwrecked proletarians as prisoners of war or worse, rather as... And the two ships confront
each other, like the limpid side and the opaque side. And the exchange is so well realized that
a young terrorist cannot help himself from making a last gesture – in the end the shipwrecked
people are to be delivered to the warship – and in a final gesture that, as usual, happens all of
a sudden, just like that, the little terrorist throws a bomb, and God forbid, it has to fall right
into a loophole of the opaque warship, and the two ships are blown apart, and in their
destruction they are returned to the sea like sterile seeds. They will not sow the sea. End of
the world, end of the film. Okay, very good!

This is the story of the ship, and it is in this sense that the ship is a crystal. But we still have a
last point to examine. You will have noticed it yourselves, we brought in the idea of the
milieu, and indeed, if the ship is a crystal, it is in the sense that it forms a seed in relation to
the milieu, namely the sea. And here we find our last actual-virtual cycle, our last circuit. We
must say at the same time that the seed is the virtual element of which we ask ourselves: Will
it sow the amorphous milieu, for example the sea? And we must also say that it is the actual
element which, if it succeeds, will sow the sea, but this time as a virtually crystallizable
milieu and no longer as an actually amorphous milieu. The actual has become virtual at the
same time that the virtual has become actual. We always come back to this same
confirmation of the crystal-image.

And who would they be, who are they, these great authors who grasp hold of a crystal-image,
not at an actual or at a virtual level, not at the limpid-opaque level, but at the level of seedmilieu? In terms of literature, it would again be Melville. But if I think of cinema – to hurry
things up because I don't have much time, we must go quickly – a splendid film that without
a doubt gives us one of the most beautiful crystal-images, I think, among the most beautiful
in the whole history of cinema, is Heart of Glass25 by Werner Herzog.26 So how does
Herzog's Heart of Glass unfold? The search for the ruby glass, the search for the secret of the
ruby glass, well… the crystal-image contains all that Jouanny said about colors, it would be
necessary to re-examine Heart of Glass in this respect, to find this ruby glass. So, presumably
it would confirm Jouanny's analysis, in terms of the search for ruby glass.

But there is more to it than this. It appears there is another story. Actually, it's not another
story, it's the same one. The search will take on catastrophic proportions, namely, the glass
factory will be consumed by flames. Okay. But at the same time, the milieu does not remain
indifferent, and under hallucinatory visions that accompany the film, admirable hallucinatory
visions of landscapes, one passes from a state of the world to another state of the world, I
mean from the world-milieu, from a state of the world-milieu to another state of the world-

milieu. The first state of the world-milieu is a flat world that ends at the edge of an abyss.
And here Herzog's images are sublime. But this vision of the world, or this first state of the
world, gives way to hallucinatory visions of another type. Which is to say, at the same time as
the text says: "I see a new land, I see a new land", there arise crystalline landscapes,
eminently crystalline landscapes, which testify to the existence of an infinite world and
which, not surprisingly for Herzog, derive straight from German Romantic painting. If you
think of the great crystalline landscapes of German Romanticism... [Tape interrupted]
[1:46:38]

Part 3

... I would say that there is a passage between the world as an actually amorphous milieu, the
flat world that ends at the edge of a chasm, to a world endowed with infinite crystallizable
potentialities, that is to say to the virtually crystallizable world. And it is the ensemble that
composes the seed-milieu, the seed being the ruby glass, and the milieu passing from its
amorphous state to its crystalline state. This time the seed will have sown the milieu, though
admittedly at the price of a catastrophe, the universal blaze of the factory.

And what is so open in Herzog's work… I fear we will find – it is not that the two directors
are similar – but we will find an equivalent – and this shouldn’t surprise us – in Russian
cinema, but this time a closed and dark equivalent, whereas in Herzog’s work things are quite
radiant. But when we move to Russian cinema, it becomes… it obviously becomes less,
less... it closes in. Because if there is an author, if there is a Soviet… a contemporary Russian
director who works with the crystal-image, it seems to me that it is Tarkovsky27. But with
Tarkovsky, it goes without saying… I mean, it goes without saying that we’re dealing with a
crystal-image. Take Mirror28 for example. A film like Mirror is entirely composed of a
revolving crystal, a revolving crystal that, if you wish, you can – depending on the
circumstances – grasp as two-sided or four-sided, two-sided or four-sided.

The two-sided crystal is composed of the two women, the hero's mother and the hero's wife.
The hero is off-screen. There are only two sides. But there is also a four-sided crystal, if you
bring in the two couples: the hero's mother and the child that the hero was, the hero's wife and
the child that the hero has with this woman. And it's a crystal that’s barely solid. Even in the
houses, we feel the dampness of Tarkovsky’s images. And you have those beautiful images
of the woman washing her hair against a wall that is itself completely dripping. It’s always
raining in Tarkovsky’s houses, always. It's a crystal, but one that has barely condensed from
its liquid state. And yet this crystal holds like a seed in a milieu.

Herzog seems almost optimistic since Herzog has the vision of a universe that crystallizes.
Tarkovsky, on the other hand, is unable to believe in this, and his personal four-headed
crystal – the mother, the child he was, the woman, the child he has – this rotating crystal
turns through all points of the horizon to question the milieu… What question does it ask the
milieu? It asks the milieu the following question: What is Russia? What is Russia? What is
Russia? A question that must clearly be understood as a metaphysical question, one in which
we are still metaphysicians: what is Russia?

And what will be the answer? There will be no answer because the question will mean: what
burning bush – and here we have the theme of the perpetual burning bush in Tarkovsky –
what fire would be capable of staunching this wet earth? Not a heavy liquid vision at all. The

crystals are liquid crystals, and everything closes. It closes in on itself. Think of the end of
Solaris,29 what we have is always this questioning of the milieu: the milieu won't crystallize,
it's too liquid for that. What is Russia? What is Russia? It is a question, for Tarkovsky, it is a
metaphysical question as it is for all Russians. The Russians are the only people to have
framed the question of their country as a metaphysical question. This is already the case in
Dostoyevsky: What is Russia? as a metaphysical question. In France, it is hard to imagine a
French author asking himself: What is France? in the sense of a metaphysical question
because that would just make everybody laugh. But in Russia, it seems quite normal to
everyone. It's the ultimate metaphysical question: What is Russia for them? It's strange... Yes,
but... well, what does all this mean?

Well, you see, this is what we have just introduced. If you remember all that we did on
disconnected spaces, empty spaces, now we have to add this... We’re not finished yet, since I
had mentioned probabilistic spaces, topological spaces, which are not scientific notions. Once
again, I insist on this: I am not applying science to aesthetics, which would be stupid. Again,
remember our method. When I was talking about Riemannian spaces, what did I mean? What
I was doing… following the method I was proposing, I extracted a scientific operator from
Riemannian operators which defined a scientific space. Okay. We're not going to get mired in
this because otherwise we'd be doing mathematics, and I wouldn't be able to get involved. I
simply extract a character, of whom I obviously ask whether what I’m doing makes any
sense. But not even a mathematician could answer this. And after all, mathematicians are
quite nice people. They will tell me that it is not a misunderstanding, no. It’s of no interest to
us as mathematicians, but it's not a misunderstanding.

So, I would say that as regards Riemannian space, the character I extract from it in the
interests of philosophy would be a space the connection of whose parts is not determined, or
not predetermined, that is to say a space whose parts are connected to one another, but which
can be so connected in an infinite number of ways. So, I'm not doing mathematics here. I
propose that by way of convention we call this a Riemannian space, because it is a case to
which a certain number of Riemannian operators refer. So, if I find these in art, it will not be
because artists apply Riemann's mathematical formulas. I will find that, for example, cinema
produces very peculiar spaces through its own means, spaces whose parts are disconnected or
can be connected in multiple ways.

In previous years, I ‘ve tried to show, for example, Bresson's spaces, where connections are
made from one to the other and are not predetermined. Here I would say, well, this is the
aesthetic equivalent of a Riemannian space. Regardless of whether or not Bresson knows
what a Riemannian space is, it doesn't really matter. It’s obvious that there are probabilistic
spaces, for example, in Alain Resnais' work. But this does not mean that Resnais applies
probability calculations to make his films. Or that there are spaces we should call amorphous,
in a very specific sense, meaning empty spaces, spaces that are fundamentally, essentially
empty. We have seen this in Ozu, or in Antonioni, but it is not that they apply anything either.
It is through their own means as artists that they produce spaces with this conceptual
character.

And again, you could ask yourself what the role of the hand is in Bresson, and in what way
this would constitute the originality of Bresson, since disconnected spaces, spaces whose
parts are not connected in a univocal way are what you find in all kinds of films today. It's a
constant of modern cinema. But what I think is unique to Bresson is this idea of the hand, that
the connections between spaces will be tactile and that it is the hand that will connect one

piece of space to another. So, it's not a prehensile hand. It is, oddly enough, a spaceconstituting hand, and this is why Bresson's cinema is tactile, almost entirely tactile. And it’s
also why Bresson's close-ups are not close-ups of faces, they're close-ups of hands. Only the
hand connects different parts of space.30 Okay. With Ozu, what you have are empty spaces.
And to this we can now add the crystallized milieu. In the work of a certain number of
directors also the crystallized milieu has this function.31

So if you allow me this whole idea of the crystal-image, I would say that what we have seen
is a crystal-image based on three or four axes. Three, if you content yourself with mine, or
four if you add Jouanny's axis concerning light and color, bearing in mind that his other axis,
that of space, coincides, I think, with my milieu… so, crystallized milieu, that’s all fine. And
then what you can all do is add other axes, find things other than the ship, other than the
circus or the ship. So, we would now have one last problem to tackle which is… an important
one. But one which defines the different axes, you could almost say the elements of the
crystal. And I would say that the major elements of the crystal are actual-virtual, limpidopaque, seed-milieu. There would be one last study to make, a very different one, concerning
crystal states. Every crystal state unites all these elements. But there are very different crystal
states depending on how these elements are brought together.

Would you like a little rest? Yes? Not too long… You can go out, but come back or I'll...
[Tape interrupted] [1:58:19]

... Here we enter… I want to say, therefore, that owing to an excess of professional
conscience I will be giving two more courses. And so, between today and the other two
sessions, could you please give me, those who want the credits, could you please give me
your little green cards. The little green cards. There you are. The time has come.

So, you see, we've reached, fortunately we've still got two and a quarter more sessions, we've
reached our last problem of the year. But regarding this last problem of the year, we're so far
ahead in it that I wonder if we couldn't shorten it by one class now. Because once we have
established all the axes of the crystal-image, we know what we see in the crystal-image, and
as I was just reminded, all this forms part of a world in which the movement-image has
collapsed, that is to say, where cinema has ceased to be a cinema of action in order to become
a cinema of the seer. Because one does not act in the crystal. You can move a lot, you can
move around in the crystal, right? There are many things that happen in the crystal, but we
don't act in the crystal. We act in real milieux but we don't act in crystalline milieux. On the
other hand, what we do in the crystal, which is as valuable as acting, is to see. We see. And it
is this cinema of seers that sometimes in a very simple sense – and someone reminded me
that, indeed, Heart of Glass runs under the sign of hypnosis32, but it is not the only case, it’s
not the only case where hypnosis will intervene since, for example, hypnosis, in a very
different sense from Herzog's, is also a major theme in Alain Resnais’ films. His is a cinema
of seers.

Now, if it is true that we see in the crystal-image, while we act in the movement-image,
what exactly do we see? Our answer is... you have known this from the very start, since
everything has been focused on this… we see the direct time-image. So, we shouldn’t confuse
the crystal-image with the time-image. The crystal-image concerns paradoxical organizations
of space. That is to say, it seems to me, that we should still consider the crystal-image a type
of space – whether it be disconnected spaces, empty spaces, crystallized milieux and so on.
These are still spaces, but the kind of spaces which, contrary to Euclidean space, have a

character that can no longer be explained spatially, that require factors other than space to
account for their own spatial character.

So, we again come back to our formula, that what derives from the movement-image is an
indirect image of time. But, on the other hand, in the pure optical and sound image, or in the
crystal-image, what we see is a direct time-image. It is the direct presentation of time as
opposed to the indirect representation of time. To the movement-image there corresponds an
indirect representation of time. To the pure optical and sound image, or to the crystal-image,
since the crystal-image is the development of the pure optical and sound image, to the crystalimage there corresponds a direct presentation of time. This is what we see in the crystal. But
in what form do we see it? Let me recapitulate: we already have our answer, there is no need
to go back to this, it is Bergson who gave it to us, or at least he gave us our starting point.

What we see is time in its very foundation, that is to say, time in so far as at each moment it
differentiates itself at the same time into two dissymmetrical jets: the present that passes and
tends towards the future, and the past that is preserved. The past does not come after the
present, the past does not occur after the present, it is coexistent with it. So that time is
divided at every moment into the present which passes and the past which is preserved. The
past is not preserved in our heads, it is preserved in time itself. Time is not the movement of
the loss of the past or the destruction of the past... [Tape interrupted] [2:04:13]

...in quotation marks because it is not a movement. This élan that splits into two
dissymmetrical jets and that makes all presents pass, that on one side makes all the presents
pass and on the other side simultaneously preserves all of the past… this is what we see in the
crystal.

But before going on, we should very quickly review the states of the crystal in relation to...
It's as if I had two, two contemporary aspects of time, the aspect under which all presents
pass, the aspect under which all the past is preserved. And here... the splitting of these two
aspects is never complete, and we know why it is never complete. It is never complete
because each time it is reinjected into the actual-virtual circuit. So it's a tendency, it's a
redoubling that never ends. As Bergson will say, it is a redoubling that does complete itself or
that only completes itself in exceptional circumstances – we will have to see what these are.
Okay, so all this is clear.

So what we should do today – but I would like to go very, very quickly – is to look at these
crystal states so that next time, I mean the next two times, the last two times, we will be able
to tackle this question of the direct image of time. In this way, we will inevitably encounter
the powers of the false, because it is obvious that the image of time is the power of the false.
And we will be very happy because we will have completed our year.

I would say, I imagine – again, you can make your own list – I imagine four states of the
crystal. So it has to work, it has to work at all costs, at all costs for me, I mean! You can
create other states, in which case you will have to come up with other examples, or other
research. I myself see four states of the crystal.

There is a perfect crystal – which doesn't exist, though it doesn't matter since we are talking
about concepts – a finished crystal. As we have seen, there is no such thing as a finished
crystal, since the crystal always denotes the limit between a crystalline seed and a milieu to
be crystallized. There are only crystals which have been arrested in their development. But

we can forge the ideal concept: the ideal crystal would be a completed crystal, a perfect
crystal. The second state of the crystal is a crystal that has defects – Jouanny has just spoken
about this – so here I will use what Jouanny said. If we think of the diamond, it's what we call
with a very pretty word, for example, the flaw in a diamond, like a kind of crack at the
bottom of the diamond, a little feathering, the feathering of a break. This is the second state of
the crystal, cracked crystal, flawed crystal. The third state of the crystal is the crystal in
formation. You can see that this is very different from the finished crystal, because here it is
only grasped in terms of its seeds and then returned to its seeds. Then the fourth state of the
crystal would the crystal in decomposition. I don’t seem to see any others.

So, we could say, well, we must... If we’re not able to find clear examples, if this doesn't
work very well… but then again if we do find examples, it's because they are more than just
examples. It's because we already had them in our heads before we formulated these four
crystal states. So, I would say – to go very quickly… I'm concentrating entirely on cinema for
the end of this session, and we will find the... so, what's going on here? Among the directors
who concern themselves with matters that are close to the circus, since we have taken the
circus as a particular case of a crystalline place par excellence, among the great directors of
the crystal-image, the first that immediately springs to mind is Max Ophüls. Well, this
perfect… What is going on in the films of Ophüls? It seems obvious to me. He makes crystalimages that refer to perfect crystals. Crystals that are frozen, cold, perfect. I'm exaggerating
of course, this is just my impression.

What shows us that here we have a perfect crystal? The fact that one does not enter it and one
does not leave it. In literature it's a little bit like what we find in Raymond Roussel's
Impressions of Africa, where you have characters who perform their feats in glass cages.33
And in the perfect crystal, there can only be one sole movement, the circuit, that is to say
Ophüls’s La ronde34. Here there is no outside, there is no milieu. In the perfect crystal, there
is no longer any milieu. There is only a milieu in relation to the seed. In a supposedly perfect
crystal, there is no longer any milieu, the milieu is inside the crystal. The milieu is inside the
crystal, and there is no other. As one might have said of Ophüls, there is no outside of the set
with Ophüls, there is only a reverse side of the set.

And the other side of the coin gathers up the dead. The living move around in the crystal. On
the other side of the set are the ones who die, while those who live are reinjected into the
crystal. Perpetual reinjection of the fellow into the crystal, remember in La ronde, where you
have the very beautiful episode of the masked old man who dances, who dances in the
crystal. He dies and the doctor takes him home and removes his mask, in this splendid image
where he undoes the mask and we realize that behind this frozen mask of a young man is the
face of a repulsive old man, and the doctor can thinks of only one thing, to return to the ball
and re-enter the round; he is reinjected into the round. In Lola Montès… 35 the images that
move me the most in Lola Montès are when the ringmaster, who has this very strange
relationship with Lola, a combination of ruthless exploitation and love, keeps putting Lola
Montès back on stage, who, drunk and feverish at the same time, having drunk and having
the flu, can no longer take it. And he makes his affectionate asides, saying things like: "Lola,
are you alright? Are you alright, Lola, are you okay?" And every time, he puts her back in the
ring.36

I could talk about the waltzes, the famous waltzes of Ophüls, which go completely in this
direction and in this figure of the round as, precisely, the only thing that can happen. I could
invoke the whole of Madame de…37, and in particular the role of the earrings, of the circuit of

the earrings in Madame de… and so on, in order to establish this idea of Ophüls’ cinema as a
state of a perfect crystal. So that there is no way out. The two aspects of time, the presents
that pass and the past that is preserved, recreate the round in the circus ring – see Lola
Montès. All of Lola's former presents, her princely loves, her royal loves, her riches, etc.,
were already tending towards the circus as their final goal. And the circus collects and
preserves them all as virtual images. Okay, fine.

To hurry things up some more, I would say we have one more step to make. Which is fine.
I'm not saying it will be any better; it's up to you to see in which state of the crystal you
situate yourself, in which you recognize yourself more. I say to myself, we have one further
step to take, let's suppose that the crystal is cracked, what would this mean? It would mean
that everything would still be there happening in the crystal, but in such a way that at least
some element would probably leak from it, and it would leak from the base.

In the crystal we still have the round, but it is unraveling. And how does it unravel? It
becomes a gallop, to return to the theories we looked at before of the refrain and the gallop.
Now the refrain, the round, will give way to a gallop that plunges to the bottom of the crystal
and escapes.38 In other words, the past that is preserved – and this is what interests us
concerning the future image of time – the past that is preserved will remain in the crystal, in
all its vain uselessness. Whereas the present that is passing will go for a gallop that will let it
escape from the crystal and create a future, create a new reality outside the crystal. It's as if
in the crystal the characters had tried out different roles and that, as a result of these roles,
they will either remain stuck in the crystal because they failed in some way, or they will slip
through the crack in the crystal because they will have succeeded, having found their true
role. Here we can find the whole question of the actor at another level, where acting is about
trying out roles until you find the right one, and the right one would be when you're no longer
an actor. What would this idea refer to? You recognized it, of course. It seems to correspond
precisely to the cinema of Jean Renoir.39

With Renoir we have crystal-images of a very particular type. Renoir, Renoir, Renoir… who
could we compare him to in literature? In literature, he could be compared to Guy de
Maupassant. Alas, he wanted to be an Émile Zola, but Zola doesn't work for him. That's why
The Human Beast40 isn’t one of Renoir’s best films, though it's still better than a bad film.
But it's not the element of Zola that... So, what was the Maupassant element? You could say
that in the 19th century, you know, the French novel, it achieved something amazing. It
attained a kind of fusion with poetry. This was something fantastic since it was able to take
the form of the stanza and make it into a basic element of the novel. This is one of Flaubert's
strokes of genius. And all that has been said, all that Proust, for example, remarked on so
beautifully regarding Flaubert’s use of the imperfect and the role of the imperfect in
Flaubert’s work, must, in my view, be understood in terms of this fantastic discovery, to have
introduced the stanza form into the novel so effectively, and to have reached a kind of
identity between the novel and poetry.

Except that Flaubert's stanzas – if it's true that Flaubert, Maupassant and Zola, all compose in
a kind of stanzaic form, which would the fundamental element of their style, splendid in itself
– we don’t see the same type of stanza form in each of the three. I don't have time to go into
this... I just want to mention an element in Maupassant that we don’t at all find in Flaubert.
Maupassant's solution – and it's certainly not the best, because he’s in no way the greatest of
the three – his solution is, I think to construct his stanzas… – and this is why the use of the
imperfect tense in Flaubert's work which is not the same as in Zola's work, is certainly not the

same as it is in Maupassant's work – Maupassant is quite amusing. The way I myself see it,
the verse begins as a kind of description within the interior monologue of someone who sees
something behind glass. A window separates him, and the whole of Maupassant's stanza is as
if the window “thawed” and became flowing water, water that flows where something
happening. The sequence of description-narration in Maupassant is composed in a very
specific way, description as though through a window, narration as if borne along the current
of water, and the two combine wonderfully in Maupassant's art because it is as if the window
had liquefied and become a stream of water.

I believe that this is what characterizes Renoir’s cinema. Things are presented as if through a
glass window, and they are imperceptibly transformed into a narrative on a waterway. I
would say that the glass is the crystal, the crystal-image, but there is always a crack through
which a stream of water forms and passes, a galloping stream of water that carries away the
characters who will be saved. The others will remain behind the glass. The others will remain
in the crystal. What am I thinking about here? I’m thinking of a constant idea in Renoir and
in his handling of actors. There's been a lot of commentary among those who are not fond of
Renoir, and who always criticize Renoir’s use of improvisation, the way the actors seem to
improvise. That there’s no direction of the actors and whatnot. And of course, André Bazin
has written some very wonderful things about this, showing that – and this goes without
saying – that this element of improvisation is fully intentional on the part of Renoir, because
in his cinema actors never play a role. The actors play a role that consists in playing another
role, which indeed gives the impression of an amazing improvisation.41

For those who remember The Rules of the Game, Julien Carette42 plays a poacher, but a
poacher who himself plays the role of a butler; this is pure Renoir. It's not simply a doubling
of roles, it's much more, it's much more clever than that, it's much more alive in Renoir's
mind. If you take Boudu Saved from Drowning43, Michel Simon plays the role of a tramp, but
a tramp who reluctantly tries to play roles, the roles that are imposed on him by the intimate
theater and the fantasies of the bookseller and the bookseller’s wife. So an actor plays a role
that consists in playing other roles. This is the great trying-out of roles. That's what happens
in the crystal, and what will emerge from this? Something will emerge if the character has
found his or her true role. It will come out in the form of a gallop, or if you prefer, it will
come out along the stream of water, which amounts to the same thing. When Boudu tires of
acting out the fantasies of the bookseller and his wife, he will escape along the stream of
water.

In French Cancan44, when the little girl has found the role of her life, she returns to the stage
and participates in the final gallop. It is the gallop that pulls along the presents that pass and
that will save them, while the round is what remains for the roles of the condemned. In The
Rules of the Game, obviously… depth of field is such a key component of The Rules of the
Game, where it arranges the appearance of a crack in the very background. Here everything is
organized in the form of a crystal-image, of a circuit where the exchange between actual and
virtual never ceases. You have the actual image of the guests and the virtual image of the
hunted animals, if you recall the scene of the hunt, or again the actual image of people, of the
living, and the virtual image of the automata that are collected in... here we see Renoir
fascination with automata. Then you have the actual image of masters and the virtual image
of servants; actual image of servants, virtual image of masters. A whole system of rhymes
that are distributed in the depth of field. Good. The whole of The Rules of the Game is based
on this.

And then a question arises. It’s Truffaut who poses it, but it's amazing how bad the answer he
gives is. Now I'm sure... Truffaut asks: Who is it that doesn't play by the rules? I think the
question is good. There is someone who doesn't play by the rules of the game. But his answer
is that it's the aviator. For those who remember the film, this is a completely idiotic and
irrational answer! The aviator is acting completely within the rules of the game. When the
woman says to him: "Come on, take me away from here, let's go", the aviator says: "Oh
listen, first I have to introduce you to my mother", that is to say that he is completely within
the rules of the game: he refuses to escape, he remains in the crystal-image, he continues the
round, he is completely part of the game. There is only one character who does not follow the
rules of the game: this is the one who is neither outside nor inside, neither master nor servant,
namely the gamekeeper. He is the only one who is banned from entering the chateau. The
others are either masters or servants. Only the gamekeeper is neither master nor servant, he is
the only one who is not allowed to enter the chateau, and he is the only one who will fire his
gun, that is to say, who will produce a crack in the crystal, who will make the crystal shatter.
So here it’s through violence. When Renoir is pessimistic, it is through violence.

But Renoir has a very optimistic temperament, very optimistic both politically and as an
individual. And he thinks that the crystal-image is the selection of roles so that at least a small
number of people find their true role, that is, the role of their life. As Camilla says in The
Golden Coach: "Where does the theater begin, where does life begin?"45

This is Renoir's question: where does theater begin, where does life begin? And in this he
means something very precise. As long as you remain within the crystal, you'll play only
theatrical roles, and that’s all. It might be good, or it might not be good, more or less, but
you'll be done beforehand. Only, this can be useful has a utility: by dint of shuffling roles, by
dint of being a poacher who wants to play the butler, you will perhaps end up finding your
role. And when you have found your role, you will escape with the flow of the water. You’ll
no longer be playing a role, you'll already be out of the crystal. This is, it seems to me, the
fundamental idea of Renoir’s cinema. And it’s very beautiful because it is not a theoretical
idea. It is an idea… an idea that is a fundamental part of how his work is constructed.

So, I would say – I'm going very quickly here, it would take long analyses each time – if you
take the admirable The River46, one of Renoir’s finest films, it's obvious. Around the Hindu
kiosk, the three young girls try out their roles. More than that, the kids try out their roles. The
little brother tries out his role as a snake charmer, and he dies because he gets bitten. And
then there's the little girl with her big teeth, a real little English girl, she's perfect, she tries out
the role of her first love there. And then, when the little brother dies, it’s dramatic, she wants
to kill herself because she feels responsible. But she doesn’t. Instead, she goes to the river –
and we have some very beautiful images of the river – whereas the kiosk was there to observe
life through a glass – but this becomes the river and so Harriet will be saved. She has found
her role. She finds her role by abandoning the role she plays in her first love. Good.

So this is Renoir, well, this is part of Renoir’s cinema anyway. So the action can suddenly
jump. He introduces flaws everywhere in the crystal. There has to be a flaw, if necessary a
gamekeeper who shoots at the crystal-image, or running water that passes through the crystal.
This is salvation. So much so that for him, of the two jets of time, the past that is preserved is
the one that is condemned, it will remain in the crystal where it will merge with exhausted
and dead roles, with the shells of roles, while the present that passes will escape from the
crystal to create life. Hence his conception of the French Revolution or the Popular Front,
politically speaking.

So, let’s continue. Regarding the seeds… where do we find them? In Fellini, we find them in
Fellini.47 Fellini had a formidable idea. For him it is no longer a question of getting out of the
crystal the way it is for Renoir, because one can no longer escape. But neither is it the same
situation we have in Ophüls of a closed and finished crystal. Fellini poses a brilliant question.
But you must understand, these are not abstract questions! To create a work, you have to have
a concern of your own, even if others say: Are you crazy? Why are you so obsessed with
this? And then you have to stick to this concern, you have to say: I am right, I am right, I am
right! Well, Fellini's brilliant idea, and it took him a long time to realize is this: the only
problem is how to enter. It's not how to remain inside or how to get out, it's how to enter, how
to get into something.

If you push this idea far enough, this idea of how I can enter, of course by enter we mean the
crystal, we find that there are only entrances? How to enter what? No answer because there
is nothing but entrances. So, what is the crystal here? It is the totality of its seeds. And what
constitutes the set of seeds? It is the set of entrances. The crystal is the transversal line
connecting all the entrances. There are only paid entries, as they say, only paid admissions.
And how does Fellini make his films? The film is finished when he has juxtaposed all the
possible entrances. Then it’s finished. And when someone asks him: how long will this film
last? he replies, for as long as the money lasts. But money is the other side of the crystal. Yes,
it is! As long as there are paid entries, there will be film. When the money supply is switched
off, the entries will cease. It's very simple.

Hence, what the critic Barthélemy Amengual has clearly identified as the structure, what he
calls the honeycomb structure in the films of... the niches, the successive niches, the
honeycomb structure we find in Satyricon48, which shows that there are only entrances. That
there are only entrances, I give very quickly two, three typical examples. 8 ½ … but this
applies to all of Fellini's cinema, beginning from a certain period, again he didn't find this
idea right away. An idea like that, you understand, is something you have for life. It's enough
to create an entire oeuvre, an idea like this. When I say it, it sounds completely flat, but when
it becomes work of art, well, it's a work of art. It's successful.49

8 ½, The Clowns, Roma. What is Roma? But literally speaking, we will never see Rome.
What we will see is the list, according to Fellini, of all the ways one can enter Rome. So,
there is the historical entrance: you can enter Rome through its history. Archaeological
entrance: you can enter Rome through its frescoes. Urban entrance: you can enter Rome by
the ring road. Memorial entrance: you can enter Rome through childhood recollections.
Sometimes two entrances are mixed. The crossing of the Rubicon, the historical entrance to
Rome, is presented in the form of a ridiculously tiny stream that a school class crosses, led by
a priest – a childhood memory – and so we have two entrances that contaminate one another.
There is the entrance by the ring road, the entrance by the frescoes, the entrance by anything
you want. And the film Roma is made by threading all these entrances together, the
transversal line of all these entrances will be Rome. Rome is the transversal line of all the
entrances to Rome, and of all the ways one can enter Rome. The crystal is no more than the
set of these seeds or the ordination of these seeds, the putting in order of these seeds. Simply,
what is very important for us is that not all entrances are equal. But we can't know this in
advance. There are some that don’t work. Luckily for us, there are some that turn out to be
limpid, though others become obscure and opaque, closing up on themselves, such as the
entrance by way of the frescos, where the frescos fade and everything falls into opacity.

Well, I think there's another seminar now. We'll see… this is the point we’ve got to now, and
that's all for today.

Notes

   One recognizes here the terms and principles that Deleuze and Guattari will develop for their final
collaboration, What is Philosophy? – though in this work they prefer to speak of science in terms of producing
“functions” rather than “operators”. See What Is Philosophy? (trans. Hugh Tomlinson, Graham Burchell), NY:
Columbia UP, 1996.
  The Immortal Story (1968) is a film by Orson Welles, based on a short story by Isaac Dinensen (Karen Blixen)
and starring Welles himself and Jeanne Moreau. It tells the story of a rich, dying merchant who becomes
obsessed with a folk tale, involving a rich old man who pays a sailor to get his wife pregnant, to the point that he
wishes to turn it into reality, dispatching his friend to find two young people who will take up the roles of the
tale. Initially produced for French television and intended to be the first part of a two-part anthology film of
Blixen short stories (the second part of which was later cancelled), it was the shortest feature film Welles ever
made and one of the few he made in color.
  See The Time-Image p 69, where Deleuze quotes Bachelard from his Earth and Reveries of Will: An Essay on
the Imagination of Matter (trans. Kenneth Haltman) Dallas: Dallas Institute Publications, 2002.
  Regarding coalescence, Deleuze quotes from Matter and Memory and Spiritual Energy in The Time-Image, p.
68.
  Krysztof Zanussi (1939) is a Polish film and theatre director, producer and screenwriter. His films, which often
revolve around scientific and philosophical themes, include The Structure of Crystals (1969), Family Life
(1971), The Illumination (1973), Camouflage (1977), Spiral (1978) and A Year of the Quiet Sun (1984), which
was awarded the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival.
   The Illumination (Iluminacja, 1973) is a Polish film drama directed by Zanussi which recounts in elliptical
form the life story of a scientist who is forced by family life and economic difficulties to abandon a promising
career for mundane work in a hospital, where he eventually assists in the treatment of brain-related ailments.
  Trofim Lysensko (1898-1976) was a Ukrainian Soviet agronomist who rose to be a powerful and feared
scientific authority under Stalin, but whose Lamarckian theories regarding plant and seed heredity and health,
which led to catastrophic famine in the stalinist Soviet Union, were later denounced as pseudoscientific.
   The text by Serge Daney to which Deleuze refers here appears in La rampe (Paris: Cahiers du CinémaGallimard, 1983). For this reference and Zanussi’s cinema in general, see The Time-Image, pp. 70-71.
  Deleuze quotes this sentence of Nietzsche twice in The Time-Image, p. 75 and p. 171, without specifying the
source. In fact, it comes from The Gay Science, (trans. Josefine Nauckhoff), Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2001,
book 5, paragraph 344. p. 200.
    On the comparison between Soviet and American cinema, see sessions 9 and 11 of the seminar The
Classification of Signs and Time, January 25 and February 22, 1983.
    Aleksandr Dovzhenko (1894-1956) was a Ukrainian screenwriter, film producer and director, who brought
international recognition to the Soviet film industry during the 1930s. Many of his films concern the Russian
Civil War (1918–20) and the collectivization period (late 1920s to early 1930s), and are characterized by
emotional intensity and mystical symbolism. Zvenigora (1928), Dovzhenko’s first important feature film, is a
lyrical history of the Ukrainian people from their Viking origins to the Russian Revolution, while other wellknown films include Arsenal (1929), Zemlya (The Earth, 1930), Ivan (1932), Aerograd (also known as Frontier,
1935) and Michurin (Life in Blossom, 1946).
    This is a reference to Paradoxe sur le comédien (Paradox of Acting, written in 1773 and published 1830),
where Diderot argues that great actors must possess judgment and penetration without “sensibility”, i.e., without
actually experiencing the emotions they are portraying as characters on the stage.
   On the actor, see The Time-image, p. 72
   Tod Browning (1880-1962) was an American film director, producer and actor whose career spans both the
silent and early sound eras. A former vaudeville and circus performer, Browning is best known for directing a
series of exotic and grotesque melodramas the most famous of which is Freaks (1932) but which also include
The Unholy Three (1925), The Black Bird (1926), Dracula (1931) and Devil Doll (1936). His films were a major
influence on the early work of contemporary filmmakers such as David Lynch and Tim Burton.
   Freaks (1932) is a film produced and directed by Tod Browning, starring Wallace Ford, Leila Hyams, Olga
Baclanova and Roscoe Ates. Set against the backdrop of a travelling French circus, the film follows a conniving
trapeze artist who joins a group of carnival sideshow performers with a plan to seduce and murder a dwarf in the
troupe to gain his inheritance. However, her plot proves to have dangerous consequences..

16
   Gaston Leroux (1868-1927) was a French journalist and author of detective fiction, best known for writing the
novel The Phantom of the Opera (Le Fantôme de l'Opéra, 1909), which has been made into several films and
stage productions, notably the 1925 film starring Lon Chaney and Andrew Lloyd Webber's 1986 musical.
   On the cinema of Tod Browning see The Time-Image, pp. 72.
   Here Deleuze refers to Browning’s The Unholy Three (1925), starring Chaney as a transvestite ventriloquist
who teams with a dwarf (Harry Earles), a strongman (Victor McLaglen) and a pickpocket (Mae Busch) to go on
a crime spree that culminates in murder.
    Murder! is a 1930 British thriller film co-written and directed by Alfred Hitchcock and starring Herbert
Marshall, Norah Baring and Edward Chapman. It tells the story of an actress in a travelling theatre group, who
is murdered, while another member of the group is found suffering from amnesia standing by the body holding
the murder weapon. A juror, convinced of the woman’s innocence, has only a short time to discover the real
murderer before her scheduled execution.
   See Session 18, May 15, 1984.
    William Turner (1775-1851) was an English Romantic painter and printmaker known for his expressive
colouring and light effects, imaginative landscapes and turbulent sea paintings.
   Deleuze speaks about the role of the ship in Melville in The Time-image, pp. 72-73.
   The previous quote comes from Melville's novella "Benito Cereno" (1856), a fictionalized account about the
revolt on a Spanish slave ship captained by Don Benito Cereno.
   And the Ship Sails on (E la nave va, 1983) is a film by Federico Fellini, set in 1914, which tells the story of a
cruise ship that sets sail from Naples with a group of opera singers, musicians and patrons of the arts who wish
to spread the ashes of a beloved soprano near Erimo, the isle of her birth. During the voyage, the eccentric
passengers discover a group of Serbian refugees camped on the deck of the ship, taken on board by the captain
the previous night. A camaraderie begins to develop between the two groups until the moment the ship is
intercepted by an Austrian warship which demands the handover of the refugees. Entirely fabricated in Rome’s
Cinecittà studios with the help of production designer Dante Ferretti, the film ends with Fellini revealing the
artificiality of the ship set behind the camera.
   Heart of Glass (orig. Herz aus Glas, 1976) is a film by Werner Herzog. Set in the 18th century it tells the
story of a Bavarian glassblowing factory that produces a brilliant ruby glass. When the master glass blower dies,
the secret of producing it is lost. The owner of the factory becomes obsessed with the ruby glass, believing it to
have magical properties. But with the loss of the secret, he descends into madness along with the rest of the
people of the town.
   Werner Herzog (b. 1942) is a German film director, actor, producer and writer. Along with Wim Wenders,
Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Volker Schlöndorff and Edgar Reitz, he was one of the key figures in the New
German Cinema movement of the late 1960s. Moving between fiction and documentary and often blurring the
lines between the two, his films are known for their unorthodox shooting methods and visionary images. Among
the most celebrated are Fata Morgana (1971), Aguirre, the Wrath of God (1971), The Enigma of Kaspar Hauser
(1972), Stroszek (1974), Heart of Glass (1976), Nosferatu the Vampyr (1979), Woyzeck (1979), Fitzcarraldo
(1982) and Where the Green Ants Dream (1984) .
   Andrei Tarkovsky (1932-1986) was a Russian film director, considered one of the most influential in the
history of modern cinema. His meditative films fused narrative fiction and poetry in metaphysical explorations
of the nature of time, art and memory. The relatively few feature films he made are all regarded as significant
masterpieces of the form: Ivan’s Childhood (1962) Andrei Rubliev (1966 ) Solaris (1972) Mirror (1975), Stalker
(1979) Nostalghia (1983) and The Sacrifice (1986).
   Mirror (orig. Zerkalo, 1975) is a semi-autobiographical film by Andrei Tarkovsky whose nonlinear structure is
interlaced with dreams, poems (those of his father Arseny), memories, archives and oneiric jumps back and
forth across time.
   Solaris (1972) is a science-fiction film by Tarkovsky based on the novel by Stanislav Lem. One of the most
acclaimed of Tarkovsky's works, it tells the story of a cosmonaut and psychologist who is dispatched to
investigate mysterious transmissions coming from a space station orbiting the ocean planet Solaris. There the
psychologist, devastated by the recent suicide of his wife, comes to experience the same strange phenomena of
that afflict the Solaris crew, as the planetary energy field produces simulacra both of his wife and his childhood
memories..
   See Session 7, January 10, 1984
   On Ozu and empty spaces, see sessions 9 and 10, January 24 and session 31, 1984.
   Whether or not Deleuze was aware of the fact, in this regard it’s interesting to note that Herzog reportedly
hypnotized the entire cast of Heart of Glass, with the exception of the actor who plays the hillside giant whose
apocalyptic visions from above provide a lucid counterpoint to their delirium.
   Deleuze quotes Raymond Roussel discussing the cinema of Ophüls in The Time-image, p. 83.

34
    La Ronde is a 1950 film directed by Max Ophüls and based on Arthur Schnitzler's 1897 play La Ronde. Set
in Vienna in 1900, it recounts ten amorous encounters across the social spectrum, from a street prostitute to a
nobleman, with each scene involving one character from the previous episode. The French expression la ronde
denotes a circular dance and also means circling around, doing the rounds, a round of drinks.
   Lola Montès (19550 was Ophüls’ last completed film, a daring experimental dramatization of the life of the
notorious courtesan and showgirl, played by Martine Carol. The film charts the course of Montès’s scandalous
past through the invocations of the bombastic ringmaster (Peter Ustinov) of the American circus where she has
ended up performing.
   See the discussion on Ophüls (also in comparison with Renoir) in The Time-image, pp. 83-87.
    Madame de… (1953) is a film by Max Ophüls starring Danielle Darrieux, Charles Boyer and Vittorio De
Sica. An adaptation of Louise de Vilmorin’s fin de siècle novel, also known as The Earrings of Madame de, it
tells the story of an aristocratic woman known simply as Madame de . . . who sells a pair of earrings given to her
by her husband to pay off some debts, setting off a chain reaction of financial and carnal consequences that ends
in tragedy.
   On the gallop and the ritornello see session 14, March 20 1984.
   The discussion on Renoir follows the section on Ophüls in The Time-image, pp. 84-88.
    The Human Beast (Orig. La bête humaine) is a 1938 film directed by Jean Renoir featuring Jean Gabin and
Simone Simon, loosely based on the 1890 novel La Bête humaine by Émile Zola. It was remade in 1954 by Fritz
Lang, with Glenn Ford and Gloria Grahame, as Human Desire.
   See André Bazin, Jean Renoir, Da Capo Press, 1992.
   Julien Carette (1897-1966) was a French actor who appeared in more than 120 films between 1931 and 1964,
including La Règle du Jeu (1939), La Grande Illusion (1937) and Sylvie et le fantôme (1946).
    Boudu Saved from Drowning (Boudu sauvé des eaux, 1932) is a film by Renoir starring Michel Simon that
tells the story of a homeless Parisian man who takes a suicidal plunge into the Seine and is rescued by a wealthy
bookseller who brings him home for dinner. Touched by his story, the bookseller and his wife allow Boudu to
live in their house so they can “reform” him into a model bourgeois citizen but an unexpected turn of events
thwarts their plans.
   See session 14, March 20, 1984 of this seminar.
    Deleuze corrects his citation of this line from Renoir’s The Golden Coach, "Where does the theater end and
life begin?" in The Time-image, p. 295, n. 29.
    The River (Orig. Le Fleuve, 1951) is a film by Jean Renoir, his first in color, based on the novel by Rumer
Godden and shot entirely on location in India, with Indian filmmaker Satyajit Ray as assistant director. The
story follows a teenage girl’s coming of age, her first love and the tragedy that befalls her younger brother.
   This discussion on Fellini follows that on Renoir in The Time-Image, pp. 88-92.
    Satyricon (1969) is a film by Fellini that follows the exploits of two pansexual young men – the handsome
scholar Encolpius and his lusty friend Ascyltus – as they move through a landscape of pagan excess. Fellini
described the film as “examining ancient Rome as if this were a documentary about the customs and habits of
the Martians.”
    Deleuze's cites Amengual's articles on numerous occasions in The Time-Image, see p. 5, 89, 184, 281 n. 8,
282 n. 15, 291 n. 21, 296 n. 31, 299 n. 21. These articles appeared in the review, Études cinématographiques
(Minard: Lettres Modernes).