1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Foucault, 1985-1986

Part II: Power

Lecture 10, 14 January 1986

Transcribed by Annabelle Dufourcq; additional revisions and time stamp, Charles J.
Stivale

Translated by Christopher Penfield; additional translation revisions, Charles J. Stivale

Part 1

… So then, right where we left off, Georges Comtesse would like to make an intervention. So,
let’s let him, since I think it will be closely related to the point where we are, and then I will
continue afterward. There you have it. [0:23]

Georges Comtesse : [Several unclear words at the start] … starting with a fragment, a fragment
from a text by Foucault which is the text, which was the preface of the book on [Jeremy]
Bentham’s Panopticon,1 and this preface is called “The Eye of Power”.2 And it seemed to me
that this preface connected with an analysis, a fragment or this entire preface, connected with the
three problems that have been posed here, that is, the problem of the relation of power to the
principle of visibility, thus the power-visibility relation; second, the relation of power to
violence, and third, the relation of power to the question of multiplicity, which was broached
here based on the distinction, the differentiation between three dualisms: strict dualism,
provisional dualism, and dualism as preparing multiplicities.

Very good. Only, in comparing the first point, that is, the relation of power to visibility, what is
interesting is that suddenly he speaks of visibility in the ancien régime, that is, to what he will
later call in The History of Sexuality, volume 1, the power of sovereignty as power of interdiction
which is repression, by contrast to disciplinary power, the story of norms of control, of the power
of normalization. But precisely in the ancien régime, it’s not power that matters in the first
instance. It is not power that, in some way, is directly in relation to visibility.

And why? Because there is a potency [puissance] anterior to power [pouvoir], the force of
luminous life, the force of God, therefore of life, a potency of light that offers, that offered, that
is transmitted to the power of sovereignty and that thus founded through transmission what
Foucault calls in his preface the principle of visibility, of the power of sovereignty. It is thus light
that assured the visibility of the body of the king, of the power of sovereignty, and by
connection, the castle, the palace, the church became monuments of visibility, manifestations of
visibility. Thus, without the brilliant force of light, of luminous life, without light, no visibility,

                                                                                                      2

no reflection, no manifestation of visibility. The force of life was the identity of light and speech
as the foundation of the principle of visibility.

There is light. This affirmation that there is light is an affirmation of the ancien régime, the
affirmation of the life of God that presupposed, like every affirmation of life, a difference; there
is no affirmation of life without difference, and there precisely, a sacred difference between the
light, clear speech, and the night, obscure speech. Hence, precisely the transformation, and that is
the crux of Foucault’s preface. Starting from the eighteenth century, the problem posed is no
longer exactly that of a center of visibility – royal visibility, for example – a center of visibility
as the radiance of a potency [puissance] of light that would be diffused at that point throughout
the space of the kingdom as a natural space, a ground and [coughing blocks a word] with certain
borders. What is wanted is for luminous force to radiate everywhere, for visibility to be able to
extend to all of society instead of being concentrated in a center. What is wanted is thus a
general, widened visibility, spread out.

Also, says Foucault, starting from before the French revolution, there manifested a hatred, a
critical distrust of the castle, the convent, the hospital, the stronghold. And this hatred is the same
thing as fear. The fear of what? The fear of what Foucault will call dark space, that is, the fear of
nocturnal spaces or what he again calls the fragments of night. What is fearsome, according to
Foucault, is the darkness and the silence of spaces that constitute so many obstacles to the
radiance of light, to the entire visibility of people, things, truths. We are afraid of dark spaces, of
blackened rooms, [unclear word] darkness and silence.

In addition, two directions follow from this: critique is not simply a kind of criticism; it can
literally dissolve, remove, eliminate all the dark spaces, for what circulates in these spaces is
precisely the unbearable, that is, the language of darkness, the language of silence, of evil, a
language which deviates from the luminous speech that remains, despite everything, the model.
In these spaces, of which Foucault gives at least five or six examples, the tyrants and the priests
hatch their dark plans, political arbitrariness extends, religious superstitions are re-enforced,
illusions of ignorance are confirmed and nurtured, schools of vice and crime broaden, bodies
deteriorate, epidemics spread.

The century of the Enlightenment therefore seeks to dissolve the dark spaces that haunt it, which
is to say, one seeks at any price not only to eliminate the dark spaces, but especially, especially,
to erase the grey areas, the opaque zones of man, and to render man as transparent as society.
One seeks to return, as they say, man and society to their transparent visibility or to their
essential transparency. A man, therefore, a man with no twilight zones is desired, a society with
no dark spaces. The dark spaces of society realize the grey areas, the opacity of man, and
intensify the silent obscurity of nocturnal force, understood as the power to do evil. And this is
the second point, the relation between this power and violence.

In fact, the difference of life, that is, the difference of the identity of speech and light need not be
annulled for the force of evil to be able to return as the force of a mobile violence. The difference
of life need not be annulled for the silence of time to be able to return as the silence of time, of
eternity. It is to avert the relation between violence and power, to ward off the moment of
violence, mobile violence, that power is exercised. Power is not violence, but this is because the

                                                                                                       3

former never ceases to ward off, contain, admit [convenir], prevent, inhibit, and restrict the latter,
to shatter at any cost the movement of its force. And in order to prevent the movement of its
force, of the reserved force of violence at first immobile and which speaks, finding its language
in precisely the dark space, in order to prevent the movement of its force as force of time,
prepares in the dark space the voice of control of the established and secondary order and at first,
at first ineffective.

What is necessary first and foremost, and precisely before the voice of control, is to impose the
gaze of surveillance, the gaze of surveillance that will thus reduce the opacity of man, reestablish his visibility or his transparency, that is, to cut off the force of time from its movement
[coughing blocks a word] and to master force by inhibiting its movement. This is why Bentham
– these are [unclear words] – Bentham writes that to be placed under the gaze of surveillance, he
says, is to lose the power to do evil and nearly, he says, the idea to want to. An essential link
between the gaze of surveillance and the inhibition of the movement of force. The power of the
gaze is what prevents the movement of force, what masters or dominates force, what converts it,
converts it into an intention the exhaustion of which is sought, into a will which exhausts itself
and which will perhaps be able to go as far as the good will of a rational being. It is by this effect
of power that visibility is assured. Or again: by visibility, power is assured in its effect.

Bentham’s obsession, as Foucault puts it, is thus an all-seeing gaze, and it is based on this
obsession that Bentham ponders visibility. He conceives a visibility, as Foucault says, entirely
organized around a dominating gaze of supervisors. It is thus no longer the voice of domination
and not yet the voice of control and of [unclear word]. The dominant gaze of surveillance that
wishes to produce a new visibility, a visibility warding off the produced violence, a visibility
inhibiting the movement of force, a visibility that we could call a visibility of immobilization,
this obsession with the gaze precedes and institutes the invention of the panoptic apparatus as
technology of power. The obsession with the warding-off gaze will bring about, in other words,
its technological realization, will pass by way of the optical apparatus or procedure, and it is by
means of this apparatus that the gaze preceding panopticism will, at that moment, become
inscribed in the social space, that the institution will, at that moment, become what Foucault calls
the effect and support of a new type of gaze.

The panoptic apparatus is thus the technological response to the problem of all-seeing power, of
the power of the gaze that surveils the immobilization of the movement of force. It is an
apparatus, as Foucault says, of subjection by means of light, an apparatus entirely [unclear word]
of visibility and light, an apparatus that thus constitutes the site of power’s exercise that is at the
same time the place of recording for a form of knowledge.

Third point: the relation between power and multiplicity. The whole strategy of the panoptic
apparatus becomes, at that moment, the strategy of what Foucault calls the centralized gaze, that
is, the gaze of the supervisor from the central tower, this gaze that seeks the entire visibility of
bodies, of individuals, beings, of activities. And this strategy is precisely a strategy of
immobilization of force [unclear words], it is by means of the exercise of power proper to the
optical apparatus that the force of mobile violence is conjured away. This is why to cut the
movement of its force, to immobilize, is also to isolate individuals, to separate them from each
other, to serialize them. The optical apparatus of conjuration immobilizes and separates

                                                                                                        4

individuals. The principle of the gaze of surveillance, which assures a surveillance, as Foucault
puts it, at once global and individualizing, is thus now no longer the principle of visibility as the
classical principle of sovereign power, but, with a new power [unclear words] and a new
technology of power, it thus suddenly becomes the principle of this new power; it becomes, as
Foucault puts it, the principle of isolating visibility.

One thus exits from the terrifying dark, frightening space and passes into a space that is enclosed,
isolated, separated; and in this enclosed space, that is, this cell where a prisoner, a madman, a
patient, a worker, a schoolchild is confined, light returns precisely through the new isolating,
serial visibility. Each person, isolated from others, separated from them, without contact with
them, becomes visible once more by means of the gaze of surveillance. And the obsession, at
that moment, of this centralized gaze, of power, is not at all to open itself to a multiplicity, but
rather – and this is an essential point – it is to concentrate the multiplicity in the very exercise of
power. That is why it was necessary, as Foucault says, at the end of the eighteenth century, for
the effects of power to circulate to the point of everyday activities, to the point of bodies and
individuals. It was necessary, as he says – and this is my last point – for power, even with a
multiplicity of men to rule over, to be as efficient as if it were being exercised over a single man.
[16:30]

Deleuze: Perfect, perfect. [Pause] In fact, you have drawn out a difference in the regimes of
visibility of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. This history is complicated because we
will have to see – in fact, we have not yet done this – we would have to see at the level of
painting, because… If you want, we must maintain, in any case, the principle that we have
already seen at the level of statements. I mean that we especially must not reintroduce a principle
of progress, of improvement, for one epoch does not improve upon another; I mean that there is
no regime of visibility that is better than another. You must not believe… some of you might
have come to think, for example, that in the eighteenth century the shadows were driven out; this
is clearly not what Comtesse meant by a redistribution of shadows and light…, the status of
shadow in each historical formation is clearly different. These are qualitative regimes of
visibility that are quite different.

So, what is very important, then, if you will, from where we are at present, is the idea that power
is what makes see and what makes speak. As if power relations summoned us to see and to
speak. But taken by themselves, as we will see, power relations are mute and blind. It is very
curious. So, what does it mean that they make see and make speak, even though in themselves, if
it is meaningful to speak of them “in themselves,” they are mute and blind? … But in any case,
this intervention went very well. Now, where were we?

Last time was our first session on this new element that was no longer the element of knowledge
but that of power. And I began one part, which I have nearly finished, that we could entitle: the
questions of principle. To isolate questions of principle is already arbitrary, but it is for the
purpose of clarity; and understand that these questions of principle, this discussion around
principles, has not so much to do with explicit principles that you would find in this or that
theory of power. It is rather a matter of implicit postulates that traverse the set of theories of
power, the bourgeois theories of power as much as Marxist theory. So, we must not take these
principles as theses, but rather as postulates that Foucault felt the need to call into question,

                                                                                                     5

implicit postulates that are subjacent to most theories of power. And of these postulates that
Foucault takes to task, we examined five last time. There was thus the postulate of property,
according to which power would belong to a class, for example, or to some equivalent of a class,
let us say: to a class. Is this Marxist? No, it’s not Marxist; long ago a Marxist [Georgi]
Plekhanov, showed that this conception of power as property of a class typically appeared in the
bourgeois conception of power, notably for [François] Guizot from the nineteenth century. The
bourgeois class as proprietor of a power of law. Okay, so it’s not especially Marxist.

Second postulate…, the postulate of localization: power localized in the State apparatus. The
third postulate is the postulate of subordination: power subordinated to a mode of production as
infrastructure. Fourth postulate, postulate of the essence or attribute: power would be the
attribute of the dominant, in opposition to the dominated. Fifth postulate, postulate of modality:
power would act by means of violence or ideology.3

And we still had one last postulate, which I said was very important because, no doubt, it is one
of Foucault’s most original points when it comes to this discussion of principles. If you reflect on
the five denounced postulates, what is the basis of their denunciation? It is that, in order to
understand what power is, one must not begin with, one must not first give oneself what might
be called big entities. Or, if you prefer, let us employ a more technical term, molar entities. Why
do I introduce molar entities here? Precisely because I am taking care to comment on the
“microphysics” of power. Foucault announces a microphysics of power. Or, if you prefer, let us
say: a molecular conception of power. I thus say, quite naturally, that there is within such a
conception a denunciation of the large molar entities that the majority of theories give to
themselves ready made in their conception of power. And if we remain at the level of molar
entities, it goes without saying that we will conceive power in terms of opposition. The big
entities are organized according to molar oppositions. What will these oppositions be? In all
senses, if you take our postulates back up, infrastructure-superstructure, dominant-dominated,
class oppositions, etc.

What does Foucault want to do? It goes without saying that a microphysics aims to go beyond
molar oppositions; toward what? Toward molecular complementarities. Only this will pose for
us another problem. You understand, this is the difficult point. I mean the point that we must pay
attention to from now on. In other words, it is a matter of passing from a macroscopic dimension
to a basically microscopic dimension. It is a matter of massing from the macro to the micro.
“Microphysics” of power. Now, what is the difference between the macro and the micro?
Obviously if it were a matter of a simple miniaturization, it would hold no interest at all. If it
were a matter of saying that we must think in small terms what we are used to thinking in large
terms, there would be no interest. If it were a matter of saying that in the State there are a
thousand tiny States, no interest. The passage from the macro to the micro must therefore not be
a miniaturization.

See page 100 of The History of Sexuality, Volume 1, where Foucault says very hastily, very
quickly… that the micro is not a difference in size. Thus, it is a difference in kind. Take the
following macrophysical proposition: power belongs to the dominant and is exercised over the
dominated. We have seen that this is a macrophysical proposition. Take the microphysical
proposition: power is a relation that passes by way of the dominated no less than the dominant. I

                                                                                                      6

will say, so that you really understand the problem, that in the two propositions, “dominant” and
“dominated” cannot have the same meaning. Even if I use the same word, the terms have
changed when I pass from the macro to the micro, when I pass from the macrophysical to the
microphysical; otherwise, it would not make sense. Whence the importance…

Do you understand this? It’s quite obscure for the moment, perhaps because it is very abstract.
Because it is a task for us. It will be especially essential that we do not fall into the trap of a
simple miniaturization, you understand, it is not a question of simply expanding. It is, once
again, not a question of multiplying small states, there must really be a difference in kind
between the microphysical and macrophysical domains. And this, then, is what we see in
particular when it comes to the last postulate that I left to the side last time, which was the
postulate of legality.

For, in the majority of theories of power, power is conceived as a function of law, of the law as
molar authority. And, therefore, the corresponding molar opposition is: law-illegality. Just as
there is a molar opposition between dominant and dominated, so is there a molar opposition, a
big opposition, a relation of exclusion between law and illegality. And the fact that we conceived
power on the basis of law is doubtless the sign that the law is an excellent molar concept for
thinking power. [Pause] Since when? According to Foucault, this would be the very fundamental
deed of monarchy. Strangely, it’s not the republic; the republic will only confirm. It is the
monarchy that introduces the form of the law. How? In its reaction against feudalism. The king
will rise and will be something other than a suzerain insofar as he reclaims juridical right and the
law as the form of right. So, the republic, with the French Revolution, will be able to reproach
the king and the monarchy for having not accomplished this program of the law, but will
maintain the idea of the law and of the rule of law [état de droit]. The idea of the rule of law is
monarchical before being republican, and in this regard, the republic is tied to the monarchy. It is
a property of the seventeenth century European monarchy, then of the republic, to conceive
power in terms of law and to found the notion of a rule of law. Therefore, the law as molar
authority is defined at the level of a macrophysics as that which does away with or prohibits
illegality. Opposition law-illegality. [Pause]

What does it mean for Foucault “to do a microphysics of power”? As always, it is to discover
something underneath, namely, beneath the macroscopic body and molar opposition, it will be
necessary to discover something, which will be what? A differential relation or, if you prefer, a
molecular complementarity. Now, it goes without saying, when I pass from molar opposition to
molecular complementarity, when I pass from macro-entity to differential relation, these will not
be the same terms even if they are the same words. It is the condition under which a
microphysics succeeds or does not succeed. Avoid miniaturization.

What will he substitute for the big opposition law-illegality?4 He will substitute a typically
molecular complementarity law… And, as if he sensed the danger, namely, that he employs the
same word in two senses, sometimes at the macro level and sometimes at the micro level, he will
explicitly introduce there another name: no longer illegality, but illegalism. He will say that, for
the big opposition law-illegality, we must substitute a fine complementarity, a microcomplementarity law-illegalism. And illegalism, which seems to me a very new concept, is the
object of a chapter in Discipline and Punish, a very interesting chapter that consists in telling us

                                                                                                        7

what? Precisely that at the microphysical level, we can very well see that the law is not opposed
to illegality. Far from being opposed to illegality, it is like a result of illegalisms. Understand that
it is there that he does microphysics, because if I say, “the law is the result of illegalisms in a
social formation,” one will immediately want to object and tell me: “but that does not mean
anything! Illegalism, even if we use this strange word, illegalism rather than illegality, illegalism
already presupposes the law. How would the law be the result of something that presupposes it?”
Well, no way.

It is true that illegality already presupposes the law at the macrophysical level. At the
microphysical level, not at all. Why? What does he mean? Well, he means that illegalism is not
an accident in relation to the law. Illegalism is not at all an accident. If the law was made for
prohibiting it, it would be curious all the same that it fails at that point. It is a simple remark: yes,
it is true, if the law was made for prohibiting, nevertheless, it would leave us dazed, this history
that would be nothing but the eternal history of its failure. This gives us the idea that perhaps,
after all, the law is not exactly made for prohibiting. And yet, macrophysically, it is indeed made
for prohibiting, but in the micro, is it made for prohibiting? So, you see: if I say, “in the macro, it
is made for prohibiting, but in the micro, it is not made for prohibiting, but for something else,” it
is not exactly the same law. I must change terms in changing domains.

Which amounts to saying what? It’s, it’s … Let us continue the analogy with physics. It is clear
that a corpuscle, or even a molecule, is not a miniaturized body. It is another world, another
element. You do not have the same elements, you do not have the same kinds of terms in
microphysics and in macrophysics. If you conceive the atom as a small thing or as a thing in
miniature, it is the only way to not understand the atom. So perhaps, in fact, the law is not
especially made for prohibiting. What would it be made for? It would not be made for preventing
this or that behavior. If it were a question of preventing crimes, theft, swindling… Well, I believe
that we must look for other means. The law has never prevented anything. So, it is not made…
Let us suppose that it is not made for preventing; then what would it be made for? For
differentiating ways of getting around it. In a certain manner, you can say: everyone knows what
Foucault teaches you. Yes, yes. Everyone knows that the law is inseparable from the way of
getting around it, that the law, with great indulgence even, shows us the ways of getting around
it. As soon as we have some issues, we will see a lawyer to learn the ways of getting around the
law. And the ways of getting around the law are not outside-the-law, they are in the law. Take
the laws governing commercial societies. It’s astounding. What does it mean “to speak to us
about the law”?

The law, in fact, is a fiction, but a good fiction; it is perhaps a fiction that refers back precisely to
the monarchic and republican regimes. Which refers first to the monarchic regime and, even
more so, to the republican regime that will extract the pure form of the law. And this is what
[Jean-Jacques] Rousseau’s Social Contract will tell you: the law goes from each to all. Now,
everyone knows that it isn’t like that. Everyone knows that there is not the law, but that there are
laws. And there is always a law that gives me the possibility of getting around another law. The
multiplicity of laws is at the same time the way in which, far from preventing a behavior, it says
under what conditions a behavior is permitted. If you are a society: how to not pay your debts.
To know how to not pay your debts, the law being to pay debts, to know how to not pay your
debts if you are a society, it is child’s play, one of the simplest means being to put you in

                                                                                                    8

compulsory liquidation. So, there is an entire system of laws, and what is included in the
plurality of laws? We see very well that it is much less a question of prohibiting an action…
“You will not kill,” well yes, but there is the legitimate defense. The legitimate defense says
under what condition I can legally kill. Good. All that is blatantly obvious… everyone knows it.
But no one made use of it the way Foucault did. I mean: it is always like that with philosophical
ideas. They rely on what is blatantly obvious to draw out something improbable or unexpected…

I beseech you, do not smoke. Today you don’t smoke, you go outside if you want to smoke, and
you return when you … Because… Yes.

Thus, it is a question of differentiating the ways of getting around the law; and you cannot define
the law at the microscopic level, the microphysical level, the micrological level… except as an
administration of illegalisms, a distribution of illegalisms in a social field and, as Foucault says,
there are illegalisms that are tolerated, tolerated as what? As compensation for the dominated
classes. There are illegalisms that are permitted as the privilege of the dominant position. There
is an entire scale of illegalisms. Everyone knows that what is prohibited by law is tolerated. Is
tolerated how? Simply tolerated in such and such conditions and in the shadow of another law.
So that the law could be defined as a function of the illegalisms that characterize a social field.
That is, what changes radically from one social field to another are the illegalisms and the
distribution of illegalisms. The law is nothing but this very distribution.

What explains, for example, the radical opposition of the Vendée to the French Revolution? It is
not simply that the Vendée is more excessive, more reactionary, more pious than the other
regions of France, but rather that monarchical right benefited the peasants, and notably the
peasants of the west, with a certain number of exceptions to the law that the revolution no longer
permits them. Which is to say: the illegalism that had been tolerated by the monarchy ceases to
be tolerable to the republic. Good. And Foucault shows very well how, from the seventeenth to
the eighteenth century, the nature of the illegalisms changes. Subsequently, the law will change
as the distribution of illegalisms into illegalisms that are defended, tolerated, allowed, etc. In
fact, where does the increase in new illegalisms come from? A change in the nature of crimes,
namely, more and more crimes against property, [Pause] the rise and politicization of an urban
proletariat before and during the revolution. This will define all manner of new illegalities and a
new kind of… [Interruption of the recording] [46:28]

Part 2

… I am heading toward this molar entity, the purest expression of which culminates in
Rousseau’s formulation: “the law is what goes from each to all”. This is the pure law, the pure
form of the law: the “you ought”. By contrast, from the perspective of a microphysics of law: it
is a point of view where the law is inseparable from what? It is inseparable from its decrees of
application, from its cases of interpretation. … There is no law that does not give rise to the
problem of interpretation. We will call “jurisprudence” the interpretation of the law. It may be
that, from a macrophysical point of view, the law can be thought independently of jurisprudence.
It goes without saying that from a microphysical point of view, law is inseparable from
jurisprudence. A law being given, to what cases is it applied? However clearly the law spells out
the case to which it is applied, you will always find cases where the application of the law is

                                                                                                          9

problematic. It is within these margins of application that the complementarity law-illegalisms
plays a role.

And just as a law is nothing without jurisprudence, that is, without the determination of cases of
application, so, too, it is nothing without the decrees of application, that is, the determination of
conditions under which… You see, jurisprudence is the determination of the cases in which it is
applied; the decrees are the determination of the conditions under which it is applied. Now, if
you consider the law as inseparable from these conditions and these cases, that is, from its
administration and jurisprudence, then from that moment, you will see that a molecular
complementarity law-illegalisms is substituted for the great molar opposition law-illegality. It is
not the same law that you speak of in the two cases. [Pause] Hence, read the chapter on
illegalisms in Discipline and Punish,5 Part 3, section 3, part 2, where you will find all sorts of
concrete analyses. So, there you have it…

Okay, we are finished with this first part on power which was only the discussion of principles.
Therefore, we can… Everything okay? There are no problems? All of this will become clearer
little by little… What I wanted to insist upon was the necessity of a difference in kind between
microphysics and macrophysics. So, if it’s okay, we can move on to the second part, which is
this time, roughly, what? If, as we have just seen, power is fundamentally relational, how will we
define what type of relation it is? What relation? And well, Foucault’s reply is very simple. The
power relation is a relation of forces.

We will write “power relation” in the singular and “relation of forces” in the plural. Power is
relational, and the power relation is a relation of forces. Once again, “power is a relation of
forces” is an unintelligible proposition, or at least a quite banal one, if you have not specified
power in its essence. Its sole essence is to be relational. That is, power is not an attribute. It is a
molar attribute, but it is a molecular relation. Thus, what does it mean to say that “power is a
relation of forces, and every relation of forces is power”? What does that mean? It is the first
thing that we have to seek out a little bit. And already, I sense that when I say, “power is a
relation of forces,” there is something I am not saying and that I exclude, namely: power is not a
form. And the power relation is not a relation between forms.

Power is not a form. There is certainly a “State” form. The State-form. But just as we have seen,
the microphysics of power penetrates beneath the great body that is the State. In other words,
power is informal. It does not pass through a form, and the power relation is not a relation
between forms. This interests us greatly: a relation of forces means something other than a
relation of forms. This interests us greatly, this should interest us greatly because we are seeking
something that differs in kind from knowledge, and you recall that based on our prior analysis,
knowledge is a relation of forms.

Fortunately, then, power is not a relation of forms and cannot be one, for it is a relation of forces.
And what does “relation of forces” mean? It only means something if the essence of force is to
be in relation. And with what is force essentially in relation? With another force. That is, force
does not exist in the singular. There is no force in the singular. All force is in relation with
another force. [Pause] Oh really? This means that force is fundamentally the element of a
multiplicity. And that force cannot be thought outside the multiple, for there is no one force. It is

                                                                                                     10

even in this sense that force takes no other object nor subject than force. This does not mean that
force is its own object and its own subject, but that force has for its object another force, or, what
amounts to the same, a force has for its subject another force.

Now, all this seems so simple, and it is so, so delicate. Force can only be conceived as the
element of the multiple. In other words, force is already a multiplicity. Force is the relation of a
force with another force. The thought of force was always the only way to challenge the One.
The thought of force is the thought of the multiple. Is there anything else than force that is of
such a nature that the thing in question would be fundamentally in relation with another thing?
Doubtless not. We can always try.

What was the most beautiful attempt of ancient atomism? The very beautiful attempt of
Democritus, Epicurus, and Lucretius was to form the concept of the atom in order to account for
a fundamental multiplicity. Namely: the very idea of a sole atom is a senseless notion, for the
atom is fundamentally in relation with another atom. And what was the relation of the atom with
the other atom? It is well known, what the Epicureans and what Lucretius referred to as the
declination of the atom. The atom does not fall through the void along a vertical axis; there is a
declination of the atom, that is, it falls along an oblique line, and the oblique is precisely the path
by which each atom encounters other atoms, that is, comes into relation with other atoms. Good.
But who does not see that this was a way of lending force to matter, and that atomism was the
attempt to localize force in matter? In fact, what one lent to the atom was what belongs to force.
What sets into relation with the other, in its very essence and according to its essence, is force.
We will have to move very quickly here, but the one who took this the furthest is Nietzsche.
[Pause]

The philosophy of force in Nietzsche is very simple in a sense, consisting in saying: atomism has
always been the mask of a dynamism of a different nature, and force is precisely what, in its
essence, is related to another force. In other words, there is an essential plurality of force, and
this essential plurality will bear witness to the Nietzschean notion of distance. To wit: force is
inseparable from the distance to another force. And what will Nietzsche call “will”? Here, it
must be said, is such a strange conception of the will. But you can perhaps sense that it is a rich
and profound conception. And well, if force is essentially in relation with force, the will will be
the differential element of forces. If force is in relation with force, essentially, then force cannot
be conceived outside of a difference between forces. Distance is the difference between forces.
This distance, or the difference between forces, is what one calls “will”.

So, there, Nietzsche monitors his terminology very well, he does not confuse force and will, he
makes will the difference between two forces. In what form? We could define will in Nietzsche
as the differential element by which a force relates to another force either to obey or to
command. Those interested in this point, see Beyond Good and Evil, §19. You find a very
curious analysis of will.

Henceforth, something -- here I am opening a very short parenthesis -- something must seem
obvious to you, it is: how and why Nietzsche broke with Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer believed
in the unity of desire [le vouloir]. He believed in the unity of desire. And where Nietzsche's
argument, where Nietzsche's comments are very beautiful, very strong, is when he continues: as

                                                                                                   11

soon as one believes in the unity of desire, one is already suppressing will [la volonté]. We have
already suppressed the will, why? This is the very story of Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer rises all
the way to the idea of the unity of desire through all its manifestations. Unity of desire through
the one who commands and the one who obeys. Unity of desire through the executioner and the
victim. But if there is a unity of desire through the executioner and the victim, the will must
necessarily be denied and suppressed. In what form? In the form of pity. The desire of the
executioner, when he apprehends the unity of desire with the victim, is necessarily suppressed in
pity. And this will be the entire movement of the philosophy of pity in Schopenhauer and the
suppression of the will in asceticism.

But look, Nietzsche slips underneath Schopenhauer, saying: you could only fall into pity and
asceticism since you had posited the unity of desire. You could only deny desire since you had
posited its unity through all its manifestations. In other words, we can only understand what
“desire” means if we take it as an irreducible multiplicity of forces, such that desire can never be
anything except the differential element of the forces present. That is to say, …desire is the
relation of a force with another force, either to obey or to command. Or rather: either to
command or to obey. For we obey with our will, no less than we command with our will.

Why do I recount all this? If you understand this point, it is very simple, …the Nietzschean
conception of force and desire (vouloir). It is no doubt so that, from this moment on, you are
prevented from stupid misunderstandings about … Nietzsche and fascism, for example. But,
further, see how Nietzschean Foucault is. If he goes so quickly through his theory of power on
this precise point, it is because he figures that Nietzsche has said what is essential, namely: in
what sense force is not violence. [Pause] What is violence? No doubt violence is related to force.
We will even say: violence is the effect of a force on something or someone. In a certain way,
this amounts to saying that there is only molar violence. It is the effect of force on something or
someone… Like when it is hot… It is the effect… But we are not looking for the effect of force
on something or someone; rather, we seek the relation of force with force. Violence states
nothing about the relation of force with force. And perhaps one will say: force is inseparable
from violence, which would mean that force is inseparable from the effect it has on something or
someone. But the relation of force with something or someone, that is, the relation of force with
a body or a soul, is not the same thing as the relation of force with force. What defines
microphysics is the relation of force with force. What defines macrophysics is what results, that
is, the relation of forces with something or someone. [Pause]

In other words, force cannot be defined by violence; it is a force on a force, or, if you prefer, an
action on an action. Violence is an action on something. On something: why? It will be said that
violence is the action of deforming. How can a force be deformed, since it has no form? I mean
that on all these points, Foucault can go very quickly, which is to say, the only text where he
explains himself on what has just been said is precisely an interview, an interview appearing in
[Hubert L.] Dreyfus and [Paul] Rabinow’s book on Foucault,6 but the text itself is by Foucault.
On page 340, what does Foucault say? Here, I will read slowly: “what defines a relationship of
power” -- which is to say, a relation of forces, I would say just as well: what defines a relation of
forces – “it’s that it is a mode of action that does not act directly and immediately on others.
Instead, it acts upon their actions: an action upon an action, on possible or actual future or
present actions.”7 An action upon an action, this is what constitutes a relation of forces or of

                                                                                                     12

power. “A relationship of violence acts upon a body or upon things; it forces, it bends, it breaks,
it destroys,” and all of this presupposes a form. “[I]t closes off all possibilities. Its opposite pole
can only be passivity… A power relationship, on the other hand, can only be articulated on the
basis of two elements that are indispensable if it is really to be a power relationship: that ‘the
other’ is recognized and maintained to the very end as a subject who acts; and that, faced with a
relationship of power, a whole field of responses, reactions, results, and possible inventions may
open up.”

“The exercise of power can … pile up the dead and shelter itself behind whatever threats it can
imagine. In itself, the exercise of power is not a violence that sometimes hides… It is a set of
actions on possible actions; it induces, it seduces, it makes easier or more difficult; it releases or
contrives, makes more probable or less…”8 This last point interests me, if you have understood
everything, because Foucault proposes an initial list of what we can subsequently call categories
of power. To repeat: it induces, seduces, makes easier or more difficult, releases or contrives,
makes more probable or less; here is a list that appears a bit bizarre. What is interesting about it?
We have no choice but to follow the letter of the text, for it is the statement of relations of forces,
the relation of force with force. Foucault tells us: be careful, the relation of force with force does
not consist of violence, but rather of incitation; a force cannot do violence to another force, but
instead it can incite another force, induce another force, make it easier or more difficult for
another force, make other forces or the exercise of other forces more probable or less. Hence a
list of categories of power.

Thus, the relation of forces is an action upon an action, that is, a very particular kind of action. It
is not just any action that is exercised upon an action. We will call “action of power” the actions
that are not exercised without being exercised upon eventual or real actions. You understand?
Thus, you have an entire grouping: relations of forces – essential multiplicity of the relation of
forces – to command/to obey as a character of the will, differential element of forces in relation,
exclusion of violence, and therefore the list of categories of power, namely, all the cases of
relations of forces and this initial list that Foucault proposes. Yes, the relation of force with force
is presented in the form… well, not in the form, but rather is presented according to the types:
incite, induce, divert, make easier or more difficult, make more probable or less.

For the moment, I am assuming that we understand halfway, we do not understand very well,
but… There you are, sense that we are in the process of discovering that the categories of power
are, in fact, of a different nature than the categories of knowledge. To induce, incite, divert…
these are not categories of knowledge. How is Foucault Nietzschean? We have partially
responded: he develops a rigorously Nietzschean conception of force. Even more: if there were,
in Foucault, a theory of the will, at this level, it would be absolutely Nietzschean, namely, it
would consist in saying: to will is to set one force into relation with another force, whether to
command or to obey. This is what Foucault, for his part, will designate by a word that is not
Nietzschean: a complex strategic situation. It is a beautiful term, a “complex strategic situation”;
for Foucault, there is no will except in a complex strategic situation. “Complex” does not mean
“complicated”, but rather “multiple”. And Foucault loves complex strategic situations.

Every strategic situation is complex. I can only will within a complex strategic situation. What is
a strategic situation… We are advancing, taking some giant steps. What is a strategic situation?

                                                                                                         13

A strategic situation is a multiplicity of forces. The entire multiplicity of forces in relation, that
is, according to their distance or their will – the will that distributes them as obedience and
command – all this is defined from within a complex strategic situation. [Pause]

Good, this opens up a horizon for us, which we will have to keep following. The strategy of
power: power is fundamentally an affair of strategy, where strategy refers in effect to the field of
a multiplicity of forces in relation to one another. In relation… as always, followed by: whether
to command or to obey. Complex situation. Irreducible to unity. Schopenhauer’s error is to have
reduced it to the One, and therefore he could not but make the will disappear in pity. Strategy of
power… So let us be guided by the words. We will see what must be drawn from them, as
opposed to their differences with what? As opposed to their differences with the strata of
knowledge.

Knowledge is fundamentally stratified, which is to say, formed. As for power, it is strategic. Oh
really, power is strategic? But then I must set into opposition the stratified and the strategic. The
strategic is the manipulation [maniement] of the non-stratified. Power is the non-stratified
element. Knowledge is stratified; power is strategic. In fact, you cannot conceive of a stratified
microphysics. Why? Because strata are like alluvia, a set of results; there are no molecular strata,
only molar. The molecular is strategic. Between the particles there is a strategy, from one particle
to another, from one electron to another there is a strategy. There is no stratagraphical formation,
no stratified formation. Power is the non-stratified. We will have to repeat this often before
understanding it, understanding what Foucault meant. Does he say it? He says it… he does not
need… at any rate he says, clearly he says it. Power is the non-stratified because, clearly, it is the
strategic. That is, it is the manipulation of multiplicities of forces. Whereas strata are the stacking
up of forms. Power has no form. Good.

What interests me greatly, then, is this initial list of the categories of power. It is as if Foucault
was telling us: here you are, a list of the categories of any kinds of power whatever, you
understand? That is important because it will prevent you from believing that force can be
defined by violence. Force is never defined by violence, but by its differential relation with other
forces. And once again, never does a force do violence to another force. These are very simple
things, but it is purely Nietzschean, and it seems to me to be what grounds Foucault in Nietzsche;
it is on this point that he is Nietzschean.

Even so, we will make use of something even more convincing than this initial list, and it is
obvious that this list – incite, induce, divert, make easier or more difficult, make more probable
or less… – he begins it like this, but it seems so… Might there be, in Foucault’s oeuvre, a second
list, another list of the categories of power that would be more justified, better explained? Yes, in
Discipline and Punish – it will be up to you to follow the chapter closely. The first chapter of the
third part, pages 135-169.9 And since I have talked about it, I can take it up again rather quickly.
This time we find ourselves before a list that states the categories of relations between forces,
relations of force with force; and as we saw quite briefly the last time, I believe, I’ll go back over
it here:

“To distribute in space” [Pause] is the heading of the first great category of force, with the
corresponding categories “to enclose, to partition, to order, and to place in a series.”10 Enclose,

                                                                                                    14

partition, order, place in a series. These are the relations of force with my force. See how the
relation of force with force takes place by way of a third party, space-time; and, in fact, why?
Because the relation of force with force acts at a distance. Thus, the multiplicity of force, the
inseparable multiplicity of force is constitutive of a space-time. And power is force set in relation
to space-time, not in relation to an object or a being. Thus, the first great kind of category:
distribute in space, with the corresponding subcategories.

Second great heading: order time.11 In this case, the subcategories will be: subdivide time (a
force is required to subdivide time), program action, decompose movement. As always, you see
that it is a force that is exercised on other forces. Where does this take place in particular? We
may not yet know, but you may well sense that this ordering of time, this ordering of forces in
time, takes place above all in the workshop, in the factory. It is the beginning of the division of
labor.

Third great category heading of power: compose in space-time. What is the strict definition of
composition? You remember that one speaks, in elementary physics, of the composition of
forces. Well, what does the composition of forces mean? What is it to compose forces? To
compose forces in space-time is to constitute a productive force, the effect of which must be
greater than the sum of the elementary forces that compose it. To constitute a productive force,
the effect of which must be greater than the sum of elementary forces that compose it.

Now, it is in extricating these categories of power that Foucault will ask himself: what happens
at school? What happens in the prison? What happens in the workshop? What happens in the
hospital? That is, what are the categories of power mobilized by such and such authority, by such
and such macrophysical body? But if I consider the microphysical categories of power in
themselves, in their pure state, I will only say and will only be able to take into account: forces
(in the plural) and space-time. As we will see more clearly later, I will not have the right to
presuppose any form, any finality, any quality. I shall have to define everything in terms of
forces, with neither subject nor object, since the sole subject of force is force and the sole object
of force is force. I will thus be able to define the categories of power only in terms of force and
space-time. If I say anything more, I am already outside the categories of power. I can thus say:
to enclose, to partition, to order, to place in a series, because these are all relations of force with
force.

But I can say nothing else. I cannot yet add “at school” because the school is a form. For the
moment, I know nothing at all of the “school” form, the “State” form, etc. I know nothing but the
elements of a microphysics, the forces set in relation and space-time. Given that space-time is the
relation of forces. Space-time is the will, which is the relation of forces.

Thus, to return to our story about postulates from a short time ago, you understand why, in the
first instance, power is not essentially repressive, which is to say that it does not proceed by
means of violence. It is not the subject of a property. Why? Because it has no form. It is not
possessed… it would have to have a form in order to be possessed. One is always possessed in a
form. Power is exercised without being possessed. And, finally, it is essentially relational and not
an attribute since it passes by way of the dominated no less than the dominant. It passes by way

                                                                                                      15

of the dominated no less than the dominant since the relation of forces sets into relation precisely
a force that obeys and a force that commands, or several forces, etc.

And, if you understand that, just before taking a break, because all this is exhausting, I will move
to a second point, which will hold by itself; but what a surprise! What a surprise this second
point should have in store for you! If force is in fundamental relation with another force -- we
start again at zero, we must not get tired -- if force is in fundamental relation with another force
and exists only in this way, then it must be said that every force has two powers and is defined
by two powers. Force is in relation with another force and does not exist independently of that
relation. Therefore, every force has two powers: the power to affect other forces and the power to
be affected by other forces. You understand. There, it is like a kind of pure deduction; here, too,
there is no longer a choice. If force is inseparable from its relation with another force, then it is
presented under the double, -- I always stumble -- under the double non-form… power to affect
another force, power to be affected by another force.

And a force is nothing other than this, its power to affect other forces, its power to be affected by
other forces. But my God, my God, I say to myself! What to call this, if not: receptivity of force
and spontaneity of force. Force as the power to be affected by other forces is the receptivity of
force. Force as the power to affect other forces is the spontaneity of force.

And now: we have seen that spontaneity and receptivity were applied quite well to the two forms
of knowledge. Light was like a form of receptivity and language was like a form of spontaneity,
according to Foucault. And now, we see that spontaneity and receptivity apply as well to the
relation of forces, to power. Spontaneity of force: the power to affect others; receptivity of force:
the power to be affected by others. We know simply, and we are sure in advance, that the words
“receptivity” and “affectivity”… “receptivity” and “spontaneity” do not have the same sense in
the two cases, since in one case, it is a matter of forms, whereas in the other, it is not a matter of
forms.

It is no longer a matter of forms, and so, what is it a matter of? The moment has come to say it. If
the relation of force with other forces defines a power to affect and a power to be affected, we
will say that the relation of forces, in any case, determines affects. Determines affects. The
relation of forces does not pass by way of forms, it passes by way of affects. And for the
moment, it must be said that there are two sorts of affects. To return to the terminology of
Nietzsche, we will speak of an active affect when it is related to the force that affects another
force. We will speak of a reactive affect when it is related to the force that is affected.
[Interruption of the recording] [1:33:02]

Part 3

… And the relations of forces are differential relations that determine singularities. There you
have it. Good, all of this is very clear. Therefore, by opposition to knowledge that establishes
relations between two forms, force can only ever establish relations between two points, and
microphysics knows no forms, but simply differential relations between singularities, between
singular points. There is a site, there is a node, there is a turning point, there is… etc. All that is
the language of forces. That should clarify things for you a little bit. To induce, to seduce, to

                                                                                                      16

render difficult, to render easy, etc. Okay, the most difficult part remains for us. What is most
difficult is that we must continue. We must continue.

Power to be affected, power to affect… I would say: the power to be affected is necessarily a
receptivity of force. The power to affect is necessarily a spontaneity of force. Now I have come
to the third remark, which is to say that force has a materiality that is proper to it, a matter that is
already force; a pure matter. What is it? It is the power to be affected. The materiality of force is
its power to be affected. And it has a function. The function of force is its power to affect other
forces.

And well, here is where we must pay close attention; you must, for the last time today, make an
effort, but a crucial effort, for you see, here we touch on the essential. Because in knowledge…
Give me a sign if you have had enough…, you can take a break otherwise… are you tired? Here
I need all your vigilance… [Interruption of the recording] [1:35:30]

… So then, it is here that we must pay close attention. Why? Why must we pay such close
attention that I require all of your intelligence? Because we are returning to knowledge, such as it
is distributed in strata.

And well, knowledge, such as it is distributed in strata, presents matters and functions. I would
even say that it presents visible matters and statable functions. Here it is very precise, … you
must weigh each word. Only, in the strata, these are formed matters and formalized functions.
These are formed matters and formalized functions. The strata, I would say, before we even
understand what it means, the strata are constituted from formed matter and formalized
functions. What is a formed matter? A formed matter is what one calls a substance. For example,
I would say that the schoolchild is a substance, a formed matter. The prisoner is a substance, that
is, a formed matter. A matter formed by what form? Well, it is a matter formed by the “prison”
form. The worker is a substance formed by the “workshop” or “factory” form. On the strata, you
only have formed matters. On the strata, you never have a matter that could be called, following
the scholastic tradition or even the Aristotelian tradition, a prime matter, a completely bare
matter.

In fact, everything is stratified, you do not have bare matter, you have only, as it was said,
clothed matters [matières vêtues]. It is lovely terminology that distinguishes bare matter and
clothed matter in the Middle Ages, no? To take up these terms, which are convenient, I would
say: there are only formed matters at the level of knowledge. There is knowledge of bare matter.
And, on the strata, there are certainly functions, but formalized functions. What are formalized
functions? These are actions taken in relation to their end. To form, to formalize a function is to
finalize it. A formalized function is an action set in relation to its ends, to its means, to the
obstacles that it encounters, etc. Well, I am saying something very simple: on the strata, you have
only… All the statable functions are formalized and finalized functions; all the visible matters
are matters that have been already formed, or if you prefer, organized. If you have understood
this, you have understood everything.

There you have it, a list of categories: to educate, to punish, to set to work, to treat. There you go.
But my question is: are these categories of power? Answer: no. At least, I assume: no. Why not?

                                                                                                    17

Because to educate, to punish, to treat all imply formed matters and formalized functions. One
educates children at school. The child at school is a formed matter. It’s not the same as the child
in the family. The child in the family is another formed matter. It’s not the same. As a child, I go
to school and I, I… go to school and I am part of my family, I literally change form. I change
form. And while I was wise and disciplined in school, here I am all full of energy and crying in
my family. Or the opposite. I am a matter that passes from one form to another. I have barely
finished school before I do my military service. This is another formed matter, I change forms
again. I borrow the form: soldier. In a precise place, which is the barracks. Fine, so is all this ok?

You will note that I can say: to educate, to set to work, to punish, to treat… imply forms of
knowledge and are inseparable from knowledge. I will define knowledge by, and as, the art of
treating – this is a definition that I could not give when we were focusing on knowledge because,
as you can sense, this definition emerges by contradistinction to what power is – knowledge is
the art of handling formed matters or even the art of forming matters and formalizing functions.
The agency [instance] that formalizes functions is the statement. The agency that forms matters
is the visibility. Thus, all this works quite well. Yet when it comes to power, it is completely
different. Take the list: when Foucault says “you want categories of power? Well, it is to induce,
to incite, etc.”, why does he not say, “to educate, to care for,” which we might have expected?
He does not say that for a very simple reason: because what is power? Power is the relation
between non-formed materials or bare matters and non-formalized functions.

What does that mean, then? Concretely, it means: if you want to define a category of power, it
does not matter which objects or beings it applies to. The object or the being is a formed matter.
It matters little to the category of power which objects and beings it is applied to, since the
category of power in itself is the relation of force with other forces and not with objects or
beings. If I want to define a category of power, then, I should not specify whether it is exercised
over schoolchildren, soldiers, prisoners, or workers. That is, I should not take into account social
forms or social qualifications. The category of power is transqualitative. It cuts across qualities,
retaining only a non-formed, non-qualified matter. A non-qualified matter can be a child just as
well as a solider, a prisoner, or a patient. You see? And [Pause] the category of power concerns a
function, yes, but a non-formalized function; thus, it cannot be “to educate, to treat, etc.”, which
are formalized functions that, as such, refer to forms of knowledge.

As a result, what will the formula be…? Here I am in no hurry; I do not know if there are other
categories of power, but what will be a privileged example of a category of power? I will state it
this way: to impose some task on some multiplicity. I can rightfully add: on some human
multiplicity. It is a question of a social field. To impose some task on some human multiplicity –
you see that I am saying nothing about the quality of the matter, be it children or soldiers. I know
nothing about it, and I don’t need to. And I am saying nothing about the aims and the means of
action that would make it possible to educate or to accomplish other aims. I am considering the
action as non-finalized; in other words, microphysics is a physics of abstract action. To impose
some task on some human multiplicity: there you have a pure category of power. You will tell
me: but isn’t this inseparable from categories of knowledge? Clearly, we know this at all times,
but this isn’t what interests us; we know quite well that power and knowledge form a concrete
ensemble. What interests us currently is something altogether different, namely, the possibility of

                                                                                                       18

defining in abstracto – that is Latin, in abstracto – of defining in abstracto the category of power
as such. Good.

This point, then, will be very important for us: to impose some task on some human multiplicity.
Once again, I put to the side the ends, the means, and the substances (schoolchild substance,
soldier substance, etc.). I have retained a bare matter, a non-qualified matter, some human
multiplicity, and a non-formalized and non-finalized function: to impose some task. This is the
relation of force with force in its pure state. To impose some task on some human multiplicity.
The material of force is a bare matter, some human multiplicity. The function of force is a nonformalized function: to impose some task. I would say: power is the physics of any action.

Consequently, you should be able to understand a very strange text, to which I attach great
importance, in Discipline and Punish, page 205, [Pause] where Foucault tells us… [Pause];
Deleuze looks for the page] What does he tell us? Here, I’ll read it… “The Panopticon…,” which
Comtesse has just been speaking about, “the Panopticon,” this very curious system of
surveillance, “the Panopticon must not be understood as a dream building” – a dream structure –
“it is the diagram of a mechanism of power reduced to its ideal form” -- you will consent to
remove the word “form,” eh, Foucault having no reason to apply the distinction that I have just
marked; here, he is employing “form” in a totally different sense, as aspect -- “It is the diagram
of a mechanism of power reduced to its ideal form; its functioning, abstracted from any obstacle,
resistance or friction, must be represented as a pure architectural and optical system :” -- take
note: the Panopticon can be represented as an architectural and optical system, colon -- “it is in
fact a figure of political technology that may and must be detached from any specific use.” If
there is a passage that proves my case, it is this one. It is a figure… you see exactly what he
means, what he says exactly. One can define the Panopticon as an architectural and optical
system, but it is not a sufficient definition. It is in fact a figure of political technology that one
can and must detach from any specific use. What does this mean?

You remember what the Panopticon is. I will remind you briefly: it is, in appearance, an
architectural organization that consists in organizing space in such a manner that, from the point
of view of a center, one can see everything without being seen. This architecture will be realized
particularly in the prisons where, in accordance with a central tower, one can see everything in
the peripheral cells, the circular cells, whereas the prisoners placed in the circular cells do not
see. Thus, to see everything without being seen, in relation to these beings that are seen without
seeing. That is what the Panopticon is, which etymologically means: the all-seeing system.

Well, I am saying that the Panopticon has three definitions, three successive definitions that
become more and more profound. Tied to the prison, it can be defined as a space of confinement,
a space of confinement where one sees the prisoners. You see that, in this definition, the
Panopticon is tied to a formed matter, the prisoners, and has a formalized function, to punish.

Second definition: I am saying the Panopticon is the system where one sees everything without
being seen. I no longer refer to the prison, and in fact this was Bentham’s idea, that it could be
suitable for everything, for all visible matters. It is suitable for all visible matters, for all formed
matters, whether this be the school, the factory, the barracks, the prison. It is suitable to varying
degrees for all of this. The Panopticon becomes a model. It is then defined as, to re-use

                                                                                                     19

Foucault’s expression, architecture … I am defining it as “an architectural and optical system”
that can be realized in the school or etc. It is a further degree of abstraction. It is not yet
sufficient.

Third definition. Foucault has just said to us on page 205: take note, it is not only an architectural
and optical system, it is a pure functioning, a pure functioning of power. Under this form, what
will it be? The Panopticon is the organization of space-time in which… or the circumscription of
a space-time in which one imposes some task on some human multiplicity. You see that, here,
there is no longer reference to vision, there is no longer reference to visibility; it doesn’t matter, I
have crossed over to a greater degree of abstraction. Non-formalized function for a non-formed
matter.

It is for this that we reserve the name “diagram”. The diagram, following this text by Foucault,
who, alas, uses the word only once…, I can at least draw from this text that what Foucault calls
“diagram” is the relation between a non-formed matter and a non-formalized function. That is to
say, it is the exposition of some action, the exposition of an abstract action. To impose some task
on some multiplicity. Moreover, or rather, even better, I can give – if I attach importance to this
word “diagram,” all while recognizing that it appears only once in Foucault – I can give three
definitions of the diagram according to Foucault, up to this point. Three definitions from which I
will be able to conclude: the diagram is power.

Ah, the diagram is power, but this will … enable reclassifications. These three definitions are the
following. I will say: we call “diagram” the exposition of a relation of forces or a set of relations
of forces. This is the first definition of the diagram, taking into account everything we have seen
previously, which I will not go back over. Second definition of the diagram: we call “diagram”
every distribution of the power to affect and the power to be affected, that is, every emission of
singularities. In this sense, the diagram goes from one point to another. It goes from some point
to some other point, these points being determinable as singularities. There you have the second
definition of the diagram. Third definition of the diagram: we call “diagram” the swirling, which
is an oceanic word, quite perfect. We call “diagram,” yes, the figure that swirls together, the
swirling of non-formed matter and non-formalized functions.

A practical exercise: how do the three definitions perfectly complete each other, that is, how can
each be derived from the one before it? I am not going to do it now, but I tried to do it. Good.
Thereupon, the principle is made. Once again, if you have not understood this point, I will start
everything over, for it is essential. I will unpack the consequences before asking you, with
passion, with supplication, if you are sure you have well understood, since perhaps the
consequences, the small terminological consequences, will help bring about your understanding.

I can ask, from what is the diagram distinguished? Well, the diagram is distinguished from the
archive. And how is the diagram distinguished from the archive? Every archive is an archive of
knowledge. Every diagram is a diagram of power. Good, what are the fundamental differences
between the diagram and the archive? Well, I can say in any case “diagram-archive,” but I could
express this distinction, this fundamental difference in other terms. I could say: strategies-strata.
Every diagram is strategic. Every archive is stratified. I could say: it is the micro-macro
distinction, every diagram is microphysical or differential, which amounts to the same. This

                                                                                                     20

amounts to the same… from our point of view. Every archive is macrophysical. I always circle
back to the following: every diagram is power, every archive is knowledge. Strategies-strata.

In other words, power, once again, does not pass through forms; it concerns non-formed matters,
non-formalized functions. Last week, one of you said to me: “but why not call this ‘microstructure’?” Yes. We could call it “micro-structure,” with one danger. If we referred to it as a
micro-structure, we would have to show that, at the microphysical level, there is a difference in
kind between micro-structures and macro-structures. But we can call it “micro-structure” if we
posit a difference in kind between the micro and the macro.

So, it is perhaps more convenient to do away with the word “structure” and to say: in effect, in
microphysics, there are no structures. The restful time is over when one represented an atom as a
structure, with a nucleus and electrons. No, that’s no longer it. Today we think about an atom as
a field of forces, that is, as a structuring activity, a structuring activity that runs through all the
stable structures corresponding to it, with a plurality of potential structures that are possible. For
example, if we speak of the tetravalence of carbon, [Gaston] Bachelard showed long ago that in
modern chemistry, the structuralism of valences has been replaced by dynamism, the dynamic of
bonds. Good, the dynamic of bonds rather than the structure of valences: this means something
very specific, that the atom is inseparable from a structuring activity, or in other words, that we
can only think in terms of a field of forces. Therefore, the word “structures” is not necessary.
Alright, all that is what you must understand. Good.

Hence the text with which I began at the start of the year, but now, as we will rediscover several
times, this text… Hence the text that will be perhaps the passage best expressing Foucault’s
passion… and this passage that expresses so well Foucault’s passion, we will see that it perhaps
isn’t the only one, but a great literary text… Perhaps we are now capable, in returning to it, of
understanding more. It is a passage taken from a great novel by Herman Melville, Pierre: or, The
Ambiguities.12 And I will read this passage slowly. So, good, we will return to it periodically.
There is no need to impassion Foucault, he has plenty of passion in all of his texts, but Foucault’s
passions strangely echo some great literary texts.

In Pierre: or, The Ambiguities, one of the most beautiful novels in the world, Herman Melville
writes the following: “Not yet had he dropped his angle into the well of his childhood, to find
what fish might be there; for who dreams to find fish in a well? the running stream of the outer
world, there doubtless swim the golden perch and the pickerel! Ten million things were as yet
uncovered to Pierre. The old mummy lies buried in cloth on cloth”. The old mummy lies buried
in cloth on cloth. “It takes time to unwrap this Egyptian king. Yet now, forsooth, because Pierre
began to see through the first superficiality of the world, he fondly weens he has come to the
unlayered substance [matière non-stratifiée].” Yet now, forsooth, because Pierre began to see
through the first superficiality of the world, he fondly weens he has come to the unlayered
substance. “But, far as any geologist has yet gone down into the world, it is found to consist of
nothing but surface stratified on surface. To its axis, the world being nothing but superinduced
superficies. By vast pains we mine into the pyramid; by horrible gropings we come to the central
room; with joy we espy the sarcophagus; but we lift the lid–and no body is there!—appallingly
vacant as vast is the soul of a man!” There you are.

                                                                                                    21

You understand: if literature has meaning and justifies life, it is based upon passages like this
one. There are not enough of them. And well, what does this passage have to do with Foucault?
We begin again. It concerns Foucault personally, I believe. It matters little if Foucault knew it,
though he surely knew it; he certainly knew Melville, but… In what way do we, who read this
text independently of Foucault, say to ourselves that this text concerns Foucault? It is as though
this passage winks at Foucault. “The old mummy lies buried in cloth on cloth; it takes time to
unwrap this Egyptian king”: that is the archive. It is the archive. “But, far as any geologist has
yet gone down into the world, it is found to consist of nothing but surface stratified on surface”:
one finds only historical formation on historical formation, stratum upon stratum, strip of cloth
upon strip of cloth, and this situation of the archive or the archaeologist – Melville says
“geologist,” but there is little difference – the geologist-archaeologist goes from stratum to
stratum. To its axis, the world being nothing but superinduced superficies.

Only, there you go, we do not go from stratum to stratum without also being carried along by
two movements. I will try to say what these two movements are. One movement to descend, to
descend deeper than any stratum, to come to the center of the earth. There, what kind of jam, eh,
that there is at the center of the earth. Because you know that at the center of the earth, there is a
kind of glue, and you have to go that far, you would have to go that far. You would have to go to
this non-stratified. The non-stratified of the inside. And we are going there, we are going there.
And by dint of removing the strips of cloth… what does that mean regarding Foucault? To
descend, but how to descend? You remember that the strata are divided by a central fissure, the
great fissure that separates light on one side and language on the other. The strata are fractured. I
have only to descend to the in-between. Between light and language, in this kind of fissure, the
well. The well. Who dreams to find fish in a well? And yet I find a fish in the well. I descend
into the fissure between the two halves of the strata, in the hope of finding what? The central
room. The central room that the surfaces of the pyramid hide. The surfaces of the pyramid are
the surfaces, the strata. And me, I descend there toward the well, seeking the central room.

And Foucault, from the beginning, in his own way, will ceaselessly seek the central room, but
over a long time, horrible gropings, horrible gropings… Nothing was easy for Foucault, you
know. Horrible gropings, going from stratum to stratum. It is not so much theory, nor is it
history, when he spoke about the general hospital in the seventeenth century; it was the strata
that he was traversing. Or about the prison from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries… And
well: he seeks the central room. And for a long time, for a long time, he lifts the lid, he knocks
on the door of the central room, and what does he find? The void. “Appallingly vacant as vast is
the soul of a man!” [L’âme de l’homme est un vide immense et terrifiant: ‘The soul of man is a
vast and terrifying void.’] There is no central room, there is only the fissure that continues and
grows.

And it is very late, very late that Foucault will change his mind, that he will say to himself that
perhaps there is something in the central room; so much the better, so much the easier that it is
something we put there. That, in the central room, there is something: yes, what we have put
there. And this will be the discovery of Foucault’s last books, there was something in the central
room. That is to say that we do not yet have the means… But at the same time as this movement
that passes through the void, eventually to discover that there is perhaps something in the empty
room, there is another movement. This time no longer to descend to seek a non-stratified inside,

                                                                                                      22

but to exit the strata to discover a non-stratified outside. This is what Melville alludes to, for
there are two aspects as well in Melville. To descend into the strata, on the inside of the strata,
and to exit outside the strata. When Melville says: “the running stream of the outer world, there
doubtless swim the golden perch and the pickerel!” Notice that in the running stream of the outer
world, which is an ocean, swims not only the golden perch and the pickerel but also the terrible
Moby Dick, the white whale and… good.

To exit the strata to come to the non-stratified substance. What is this? Here, we are surer of
ourselves. Since, as far as the history of the central room, we do not yet know, we do not yet
have the means to know what it was for Foucault; we can only do so by progressing, but now,
now we have at least an idea about the outside of the strata. Yes, the outside of the strata is the
oceanic diagram. The oceanic diagram that does not cease to swirl together the relations between
forces. That is the outside of the strata, the non-stratified element: it is the global strategic
element. Global strategy in the sense that it is not only human beings who have a strategy; things
also have a strategy. It does not matter which things: particles, electrons, all that, all the fields of
forces. What defines a strategy is a field of forces, whether it be human or not.

Thus, you see the three movements of Foucault: to go from stratum to stratum along welldesignated, well-delimited durations. To descend eventually into the fissure between the strata,
in the search for a central room, with the despair that entails: there is nothing in the central room.
And, third movement, to leave the strata to come to the element that is properly oceanic, nonterrestrial, the non-stratified element, the strategic element. It is true that every strategy is
oceanic. Look at [Paul] Virilio. So then… There you have it. You understand? Good.

We asked for two axes: knowledge-power. Whereas, and this is not the first time in our analysis
that we have had one too many, we have three. There is the history of the room, of the inside,
that we are leaving to the side for the moment, but we fall back on our two knowledge-power
axes. And the difference in kind between power and its diagram, on the one hand, and
knowledge and its archives, on the other. There is no archive of the sea, there are only port
archives. Power is of the sea. Um… well, I’m taking the plunge. What is it? It is molecular.
Water is molecular. Good. And so… There you have it.

Hence my appeal: this must all be clear. If it isn’t clear, I will start all over. It’s all the same to
me. If it is crystal clear, … well, I will continue a little bit, but perhaps we have had enough…
No problem? That is nevertheless surprising to me because all of this is very difficult. [Laughter]
All the same, I have a suspicion… [Pause] Okay. Let’s accept it. You will always surprise me…
[Interruption of the recording] [2:17:54]

Part 4

… We went through lists of examples, the first example of which we borrowed from an
interview with Foucault: to induce, to provoke, etc. These were just a few unsituated examples.

The second, more serious series of examples was defined as a function of space-time: to
distribute in space, to order time, to compose space-time. And you see that this was correct, that
these really are definitions of categories of power. Why? Since I did not take account of forms,

                                                                                                  23

neither at the level of matters… I took account neither of formed matters, nor of formalized
functions. I only took account of forces and space-time.

I said: to order, but why to order? To serialize, why to serialize? And where? Is it at the school or
in the workshop? I didn’t say it, it was thus… it was part of the diagram. And then, when I tried
to give an even more general definition, I said: to impose some task on any multiplicity
whatever. You understand, the difficulty is this: my diagram must nevertheless be varied. Yet
how can we reconcile variety and abstraction? Since it is a physics of abstract action, how can it
be variegated? The answer is relatively simple: variation cannot stem from any form, therefore
variation can only stem from space and time. [Pause]

It is the manner in which abstract action will be in an abstract space-time that explains how the
figures of the diagram will be able to vary. So that I conceive that in a diagram, there are always
several figures, that is, several relations of forces. Several relations of forces. That is why,
regarding this problem of detail, The History of Sexuality, Volume 1 marks a significant
development from Discipline and Punish; for, in my view, Discipline and Punish only studies
one type of abstract action: to impose some task on some human multiplicity, in which kind of
space-time? In a limited space-time. In a well-defined space-time, a closed space-time. Which
implied that the multiplicity be not too numerous. For all this I have remained in the abstract,
thus I could conclude: to impose some task on some human multiplicity, on the condition that
this be in a closed space-time and for a multiplicity that is not too numerous. This was my
category of power.

You may remember, as we saw in the first trimester, that The History of Sexuality, Volume 1
introduces a second abstract action: to manage life in a large multiplicity and in an open space.
This is effectively another type of abstract action. But Discipline and Punish does not take into
consideration this other type of abstract action; The History of Sexuality, Volume 1 is the first to
include it. And Foucault will tell us, in fact, that there is a political anatomy, which is the first
aspect, but there is also a biopolitics: to manage life in large multiplicities and in open spaces.
And disciplinary societies were defined… or at least, power in disciplinary societies – which is
to say, according to Foucault, our societies since roughly the middle of the eighteenth century –
power in disciplinary societies was defined by these two…, I will call them “diagrammatic
traits,” by these two diagrammatic traits: to impose some task on some multiplicity that is not too
numerous in a closed space-time; and to manage life in a large multiplicity and an open space, to
control life, the biopolitics of populations. In one case, the multiplicity is the number of those
who are gathered together in a closed space; in the other case, it is a population distributed in an
open space or in a large space. Thus, I would say: this is how the diagram that we could call the
“disciplinary diagram” is defined, the diagram of power proper to disciplinary societies.

In fact, these are two ways of being in space-time that are very different from one another. It
would be very interesting to seek out the differences between the two space-times, the open
space of large multiplicities … -- why? – and the closed space of small multiplicities. It would be
very interesting because we could give precise meaning to the words that Foucault seemed to use
vaguely. “To make probable,” when Foucault gives this as an example of a relation of forces:
biopolitics does not cease to make probable. For example, it purports to make increases in the
birth rate probable; it purports to supervise [surveiller], this is a kind of management…,

                                                                                                    24

biopolitics implies a management of probabilistic phenomena, births, deaths, marriages, etc. For
example, to make probable an increase in marriage is to provide tax incentives for marriage.
There you are. For our governments, in their wisdom, will go that far. No, not in their wisdom …
well, it is delicate. Good. … We could conduct a comparative study of the two spaces, the space
of large multiplicities and the space of small multiplicities. In my view, these are two spaces that
differ in kind. These are two spaces that differ in kind.

I am thinking of a distinction made by [Pierre] Boulez which Foucault knew well. So, this will
be a parenthesis. He distinguishes, for music, between a space that he calls striated space and a
space that he calls smooth space. Striated space, he says, is a space that must be counted in order
to occupy it. One must count in order to occupy. It is a space defined by size and measure. What
is this in music? It is the pulse, which is a bass unit, and the tempo, which is a certain number of
units. You see, pulse and tempo define a striated space. The occupation of striated space is a
matter of speed and slowness. There is always a speed index in striated space. Very important for
music, in fact.

Smooth space is not like that; it is an open space that has no unit of measure, no tempo, no pulse.
Boulez will call it a non-pulsed space-time. There is no speed index, there is no measure. There
is an occupation index. It’s not that there is no number. There is a number, there are numbers in
smooth space, that is what is very important; but in striated space, the number…, there are
numbers, and the numbers are subordinated to the measures. In smooth space, by contrast, the
numbers measure the sizes, they measure the lengths. In smooth space, musically, you have this
in modern music, you have plenty of smooth spaces. [Olivier] Messiaen makes smooth spaces. It
is a space in which probabilistic phenomena are distributed. You see, it is an index of density or
rarity. It is not a speed index. It is, says Boulez, an occupation index, not a speed index. Smooth
space is more or less occupied, but in any case, it is occupied without counting, that is, without
measure. The number, there, is the number that measures the probability of events emerging in
space-time, it is a probabilistic space. Good.

It is the space – I am returning to Foucault – it is the space of biopolitics. I would say that open
space is a type of smooth space. It is a space consisting of degrees of density and rarity: density
of population, density and rarity of marriage, etc. It is a space defined by indices of density and
rarity, quite different from the other, which is a measurable space defined by indices of speed.
You see, I would say: in the one case, you have the striated space of small multiplicities with
well-defined space-time, striated space-time; in the other case, you have smooth space-time for
large multiplicities that are distributed in themselves [se répartissent en lui]. In the one case, you
distribute the space according to given elements. In the other case, you distribute elements in an
open space. There will be a whole game of nature [jeu de nature] between the two types of
space. Good, but… this would be to say: these are two different diagrammatic traits. But then:
new small difficulty, but we will stop because… But here it is only a matter of small difficulties,
really nothing at all.

One is quite often left with the impression that Foucault… On the one hand, he uses the word
“diagram” only once, …but well, it’s like that, and then there you are. … On the other hand,
there is the thing everywhere, it seems to me, but one has the impression that this status of power

                                                                                                      25

relations or relations of forces, such as the diagram expresses them, is reserved for our modern
societies, namely, disciplinary societies.

Thus, the question becomes: is this reference to a diagram of power unique to our modern
societies, or does it apply to every society? Our societies of discipline were formed both based
on and against the societies -- Comtesse pointed this out quite well -- the societies that Foucault
terms “of sovereignty.” And well, one of two things must be true. Either it must be said that in
societies of sovereignty, there is no diagram because the sovereign filled in for it, or it must be
said that in societies of sovereignty, there is perfectly well a diagram, that there is a diagram of
sovereignty different from the disciplinary diagram. Here one must choose, it being said that
Foucault provides us with no answer and does not pose this problem.

We ourselves do not have much … hesitation, we can say: clearly every social formation refers
to a diagram of power. Only, it is not the same, and there is nothing surprising about this since
one of the fundamental characteristics of the diagram is its fluid, fluctuating character. The
diagram is always unstable. By definition, relations of forces are unstable, there is never an
equilibrium of relations of forces. What is in equilibrium are the strata. The strata, yes, are in
equilibrium. Relations of forces, strategy is never in equilibrium. The diagram is fundamentally
unstable, so it is clear that the diagram is not reserved for our societies. Only, the diagram never
stops going through [traverser] mutations. The diagram is fundamentally mutant, and Foucault
will several times spell this out, speaking of a site of mutation; we will see this, we will see it
later on.

I am just pointing out that, in fact, the diagram will be completely different. What will the
diagram of societies of sovereignty be? Let’s try to find out, going quickly instead of proceeding
point by point. We saw that the first diagrammatic trait of discipline was what? To construct a
productive force greater than its composite forces, that is, to combine forces, to compose forces.
That is what a diagram of discipline is: to divide the labor in order to increase the output, for
example. And well, the diagram of sovereignty will no longer be that.

Action upon an action: what is the action upon an action within a formation of sovereignty? It is
levying [prélever]. A force that levies on another force is an action upon action, no less than in
the case of discipline, but it is an action of sovereignty, an economy of levying, a diagram of
levying and no longer a composition of forces. A force that levies on other forces: that is the
diagram of sovereignty. It will levy, for example, on the product when it comes to taxes, or on
production when it comes to work assignments [corvées]. Levying everywhere. Instead of
composition. This will be the first so-called diagrammatic trait of societies of sovereignty, of the
diagram of sovereignty.

Another trait: it is not a matter of managing life, which was the other trait of discipline, but of
deciding death. A force that decides death instead of supervising life – here, too, is implied a
completely different space-time –, this is also a diagrammatic trait of societies of sovereignty.

Second remark, therefore, I am moving forward in my answer: yes, societies of sovereignty also
refer to a diagram. The diagram is not at all unique to societies of discipline. Second remark: the
diagram is so unstable that, in the end, it is in perpetual mutation, in a state of perpetual

                                                                                                     26

transformation. This is why it can never be restricted to any one formation. It should almost be
said: it is always intermediate between two formations. The diagram is always intermediary, it is
always unstable, thus intermediate between two social formations. This is why it is nonstratified. It is always inter-stratigraphical. Between two strata. Foucault explicitly gives an
example of this in Discipline and Punish, page 141, Napoleon. There is a Napoleonic diagram.
The Napoleonic diagram is characteristically intermediate between the old sovereignty and the
emergent discipline. It is a diagram of both sovereignty and discipline. Moreover, it is Napoleon
who invents the disciplinary diagram. You will see this passage, very interesting.13

Third little remark, right? -- These are exercises, fanciful exercises -- Are we, today, still in a
disciplinary diagram? Can we say, for example, following the tenants of postmodernism, that…
it would amount to saying that information technology and the related disciplines have changed,
…representing a mutation of the diagram and propelling us into another type of society that is
already no longer disciplinary, though it is no less cruel and no less harsh, but that the relations
of forces no longer pass through the disciplinary diagram. Think it over… it does not seem very
interesting to me, but, well, just because. Okay, it would have to be seen whether current
methods of control still borrow from the old model of the disciplines or borrow instead from
completely new models, and which new models?

And next, final remark, equally insignificant. We ventured in the other direction the last time, if
you recall, and I will summarize that here. Namely: there is indeed a diagram corresponding to
so-called primitive societies. Here, too, a problem that is absolutely not broached by Foucault,
but I tried to say, last time, that if you consider what we call primitive societies, there is a
diagram that is irreducible to a molar structure. There is a molecular diagram, which is what?
Which is constituted by the relations of forces in these societies, and the relations of forces
constitute the network of alliances … insofar as this network of alliances forms a microphysics
of primitive societies, insofar as it cannot be deduced from lines of filiation. The alliances
between two lines of filiation cannot be deduced from these same lines, but mobilize a different
dimension, a transversal dimension opposed to… distinct from the verticals of filiation. And I
can say that a network of alliances in primitive societies really constitutes the microstructure, if
you like, or rather the strategy of these societies. Whereas their lines of filiation constitute their
kinship structure. But you will never deduce the network of alliances from the kinship structure.
Now, is it a coincidence if the relations of forces pass through the network of alliances?

There you are, then, we have an aggregate… I would add… ah yes, final point… At the limit, it
would have to be said -- I do believe, if it’s not a misinterpretation of Foucault’s thought -- that
there are as many diagrams as you like. It all depends on where you situate the strata. In any
case, there are diagrams as soon as there is a new strategy. And, to take an example, in
interviews, especially at the end of his life, Foucault insists on what he calls the importance of
pastoral power, saying: this is a very curious power because it is a power that was invented.
Thus, here too there is… it is a relation of forces, but an invented one, a new relation of forces
that appears with the Catholic church. Pastoral power. “We the shepherds!”

The model will be Platonic. It will not be the first time that Christianity will have borrowed from
Plato; Plato’s great text on power and the pastoral is The Statesman. When the statesman is
confronted by the person who shepherds the sheep, the flock. To shepherd a flock: …well, there

                                                                                                   27

you are, a diagrammatic trait. To shepherd some flock or herd, whether these be cows, sheep, or
men: that is a beautiful diagram. And, well, so it is that we are told: men, you are a flock, you are
the flock of the good God, therefore a natural power is exercised over you by the shepherd of the
flock, that is, by the man of God or the priest. With regard to Nietzsche’s question “what new
power does the priest invent?”, Foucault replies: he invents pastoral power. A reply that
Nietzsche had not foreseen. As for Nietzsche, he gives another answer. The priest will invent this
extraordinary thing: pastoral power. What is so extraordinary about pastoral power? But think it
over. Flock, flock… okay.

Yet it is an individualizing power. What is specific to the shepherd? He does not count. The man
who counts is the man of striated spaces. It will be necessary to wait for the eighteenth century
for power to pass through calculation and measurement. No, the shepherd does not count. But
what does he do? His quantitative appreciation of the flock nevertheless enables him to
individualize his subjects. And if, in the herd of goats, Sweetheart goes missing, he will notice at
first glance. And if the cow Blanchette goes missing from the herd of cows, he will notice at first
glance and he will say: the fox ate it.

In other words, pastoral power is a power that is exercised over a multiplicity assimilated into a
flock or herd… You see, it is a very original diagrammatic trait, which can be reduced neither to
the small multiplicities from earlier, nor to the large multiplicities from earlier, but is something
else. …assimilated to a flock, a flock within which power produces individualizations, which is
to say, it is a power of detail. To know that Blanchette is well-groomed, … a power of detail, of
care, of daily care. But take into account that in the same period, the sovereign completely could
not care less about daily care. The daily care of his subjects: that’s crazy talk! What does he care
about that? What he is asking for comes from levying. He asks only that his subjects be in good
enough health for there to be something to levy. But that they be well-groomed, that they have
trimmed fingernails, the sovereign couldn’t care less about any of that. But the shepherd, quite
the contrary. It is necessary that in his individual… individualizing appreciation of each member
of the flock or herd, the horn of the cow not imperil the eye, so it must be filed down in time. For
that is an abominable image, right?

But what do you want the cow to do, she only has to wait, she only has to await the most horrible
death. If the shepherd does not manage to… does not file down the horn. Or else how many,
many sheep have died from not being able to get up, since these stupid beasts do not know how
to stand up! Thus, if you want to kill a sheep, you approach stealthily like a wolf [à pas de loup],
literally “a wolf,” from behind, you scare it, it topples, this dumb brute finds itself on its back,
and you know that it is incapable of standing back up. So, it dies if the shepherd does not come
by, it dies from hunger, it will stay there until dying, if the shepherd does not come by to stand it
upright. The other sheep do not care about the first sheep and do not try to stand it upright. Even
the lambs. Good. And all that shows you what a shepherd is. “I will take care of you in the flock,
up to the smallest detail.” What terrifying power, that of the priest. Terrifying, yes. It is a very
new type of power. The sovereign does not propose this, again, it is the priest who proposes it.
The pastoral power of the Church. And it will therefore be necessary for me to examine my
conscience and every detail of my conscience in order to report it to my shepherd and say: “you
see, I am your sheep.” And he will say to me: “yes, yes, you are such a good sheep” or “not a
good sheep”. Um, I would say: “I am not a good sheep.” And he will say to me: “it does not

                                                                                                                      28

matter since the door to the flock is open, but you will not continue to be a bad sheep,” etc. A
stunning power, pastoral power.

And the marvel is when Foucault will show how one of the great diagrammatic originalities of
pastoral power is thus the individualization of subjects, a power that individualizes, and then it
will be necessary to await the disciplinary power of societies, of secular societies, in order for
them to borrow from the pastoral Church this diabolical project: to individualize the citizens.
And at this moment one of the aspects of pastoral power will become the object of State power,
and State power will propose individualizing its citizens. In what form? In the form of the
disciplines. The disciplines must bear on detail, which schoolchildren know something about.

Alright then, all of this to say – here I am just concluding, at the juncture where we are – that as
for me, I believe the question must be answered thusly: yes, every social formation refers to a
diagram for a simple reason… or to several diagrams for the simple reason that all diagrams are
unstable and fluid, whereas the social formations are in relative equilibrium, and there is no
society that does not refer to a microphysics of power. Thus, there are diagrams everywhere
between the strata. [End of the recording] [2:49:41]

Notes

 Jeremy Bentham, Le Panoptique (Paris: Belfond, 1977); Panopticon, or the Inspection House (1791) (Whitefish,
MT: Kessinger Publishing, 2009).
    Conversation with Foucault, J-P Barou and M. Perrot, pp. 9-31; in Dits et Écrits IV, pp. 190-207.
    On the postulates, see Foucault, “A New Cartographer”, pp. 24-30.
  In Foucault, “A New Cartographer”, Deleuze outlines the importance of the sixth postulate as well as the
distinction between illegality and illegalism, notably in the chapter of Discipline and Punish titled in the translation
“Illegalities and delinquency”, but which should be “Illegalisms and delinquencies” (“Illégalismes et délinquences”
in Surveiller et punir).
    Discipline and Punish, Part 3, section 3, part 2, as indicated in the previous note.
 Michel Foucault, Un parcours philosophique (Paris: Gallimard, 1984); Michel Foucault, Beyond Structuralism and
Hermeneutics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982, 1983).
    Foucault, “The Subject and Power,” Power: Essentials Works of Foucault, Volume 3, 340.
    Foucault, “The Subject and Power,” Power: Essentials Works of Foucault, Volume 3, 340-341.
    Foucault, Discipline and Punish, Part 3, chapter 1, “Docile Bodies”, pp. 135-169.
     This corresponds to the first segment of this chapter, “The Art of Distributions”, pp. 141-149.
     This corresponds to the second segment of this chapter, “The Control of Activity”, pp. 149-156.
  See the Project Gutenberg Ebook of Pierre; or, The Ambiguities, www.gutenberg.org , EBook #34970, page 724.
Deleuze discussed this book during session 2 of this same seminar, October 29, 1985, but had already discussed it in
session 6 of Cinema seminar 3, December 20, 1983.

                                                                                                    29

     On the shift from the diagram of sovereignty to that of discipline, see Foucault, pp. 40-42.