1

Gilles Deleuze
Seminar on Foucault, 1985-1986
Part III: Subjectivation
Lecture 25, 27 May 1986
Transcribed by Annabelle Dufourcq
Translated by Billy Dean Goehring; time stamp and additional revisions, Charles J. Stivale

Part 1
… And I’m just coming back to my answer… the answer I gave to… to somebody… obviously,
what I’ve offered you is an interpretation of Foucault’s thought.1 But what do I mean by
interpretation? For me, to interpret… I think it’s beautiful how Heidegger puts it, that all
interpretation is an act of violence. For me, to interpret means, strictly speaking, two things. It
means uncovering an author’s original concepts, and as I’ve often said, concepts are particular to
philosophy no less than colors are to painting, or lines. You wouldn’t confuse one of [Piet]
Mondrian’s lines with one of… of [Wassily] Kandinsky’s. Likewise, you do not confuse the
concepts surrounding one philosopher with the concepts of another. Even if you can draw a
connection between both of their concepts—just as you can between a painter’s lines and those
of some other painter—I mean that major concepts are signed, and I see philosophy as a creative
task. It’s a question of creating new concepts as they’re needed, not according to social
requirements but ones that are arguably deeper.
Thus, to talk about a philosopher is necessarily to interpret them, to the extent that it involves
drawing out the new concepts they were able to invent. These concepts are sometimes designated
by well-known common nouns, despite having radically new meanings. Sometimes they’re
designated by less familiar common nouns. By that I mean common nouns which take on new
senses. Sometimes it’s necessary—but why is it suddenly necessary? We have to look in each
case—sometimes it’s necessary to coin a word, a new name. So, I judge that this year, based on
my own way of reading, we’ve covered a few concepts that I picked out as concepts original to
Foucault.
The second way I understand “interpretation” is as mapping out the lines, following a certain
order—this order can be very complex, but you have to choose one, at any rate—to map out the
lines that tie these concepts together and to other concepts from other philosophers who are
especially relevant to the philosopher under consideration. You see, for me… I say “for me” not
because I feel I’m right but because I want to be clear—I’m not saying that everyone understands
interpretation this way. For me, interpretation is absolutely not the search for what something
means.
I understand interpretation to mean uncovering conceptual nodes, or conceptual creations,2 and
mapping out how concepts are connected to each other. So, maybe today and next time, for those

                                                                                                          2

who want to come… I think the only reason to come in would be if you had something to say
about our work this year. There are two sorts of things you can bring me, plus whatever else you
come up with. The first thing you can say is “Personally, I see things differently.” That is, you’ll
say, “Foucault has some very original concepts that you’ve overlooked,” or “There are some
links between concepts that you missed.” It might be on particular aspects or on the whole. Then
I’d say you’d be offering a different interpretation.
And I believe that not all interpretations are worthwhile; an interpretation’s criterion, what makes
it better than another, is its richness—it isn’t its inherent truth [but] its richness, its weight; it’s its
weight. Just as one talks about the weight of a color, concepts have weight. You’d have to define
a concept’s coordinates… I mean, if we’re talking about color, one talks about… about light,
saturation, and weight. In music, you have other criteria. In philosophy, you’d have to define the
coordinates of a concept. Are we talking about the concept’s weight like we talk about the
weight of a color? Do we mean that a concept is saturated? Uh… so on, and so forth… But
really, that’d be a different analysis.
So, of course what I want from you is to say, in general or in particular, not that “there’s
something wrong” [with my account], since that’d hurt my feelings, but that there’s something
important that I failed to see. That’s all. Well… but I’ll back up even further, while I have a few
of you who—legitimately—understand interpretation totally differently and who’d say that my
take on interpretation, as I’ve just tried to describe it, is insufficient and shouldn’t abandon the
question “What does it mean?” For my part, you see, if I’m leaving the question, “What does it
mean?” aside, it’s because “what it means” strictly depends on the novelty of the invented
concepts and chains of concepts, and it will always mean [what it means] according to the
concepts invented. That’s why I say that the true reversal, for me… in my opinion it holds for all
philosophy, again, that concepts are signed. You can’t say “I think” without referring to
Descartes and without drawing from Descartes’s world. And if you transform it as much as Kant
did, then you create a new concept, but this new concept traces a line you have to account for: in
what sense it derives from Descartes and in what way Kant transforms it. That means something
very simple: proper nouns never designate people; proper nouns name operations, either of
nature or of the mind. There is a lot to console us in that, since we are made of proper nouns, but
we are not people… [Interruption of the recording] [9:00]

Part 2
… How do you recognize it? You recognize it by the need… Then, how do you recognize that
it’s a new concept? It… How do you recognize concepts? … It comes back to working with
coordinates. Thus, that’s what I want from you—maybe a little today and then next time. If you
have nothing to say, then hey—I won’t have anything to say, either. So, we’ll meditate in
silence. And then today… it’s just… yes, because there are some small things I had to skip,
because I got too caught up in my schema last time… uh… I do have some things… so, a line, I
said there was a line from Foucault between Foucault and Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, around this
business of the fold and the unfold. I’d like to take this opportunity, perhaps, to say very briefly

                                                                                                   3

and even very vaguely since this is no longer my subject… you see that I already… I have
nothing else to say, so uh… I’ll force myself a bit and try to discuss the relationship between this
business of the fold and the unfold… well, it doesn’t seem to me very fundamental.
And… and well, in the same vein, I asked one of you who, by the way, suggested that we take a
look at… Anyway, it’s someone contemporary with Foucault, Pierre Boulez… and who Foucault
knew very well, and Boulez knew Foucault very well… There’s a piece or rather a set of pieces
of Boulez which are titled Fold by Fold.3 And I thought, hey now! If there was someone
competent among us—and I have to say that this year we’ve had so many great talents… I’ve
always been very pleased with Paris VIII audiences, but rarely do we have… I can now say at
the year’s end that I’ve been teaching people of whom I feel most know Foucault’s writing as
well as I do. That’s been very, very special to me and a sort of force…
But I was saying, we have this work, Fold by Fold, and Boulez borrows the expression, “fold by
fold” from a poem by Mallarmé, and he calls it Fold by Fold and the pieces, this complex piece
by Boulez, is built around three great Mallarmé poems, two to a lesser extent, right—yes?4
The presenter: [Inaudible comments; he explains the organization of Boulez’s composition in
dialogue with Deleuze]
Deleuze: That’s it, yes, the title…
The presenter: [Inaudible comments]
Deleuze: Okay, yes—
The presenter: [Inaudible comments]
Deleuze: The three “Improvisations” …
The presenter: And the final piece is “Tombeau”…
Deleuze: Ah, I forgot “The Tomb” for [Paul] Verlaine!5 Uh… then, it’s not music based on a
few Mallarmé poems, it’s… Few musicians, I think, have reflected as much as Boulez has on the
musical text/poetic text relationship. So, when he borrows—we’ll see under what conditions—
when he borrows from Mallarmé for the main title of this work, Fold by Fold, it must be noted
that he takes it out of its context—the Mallarméan context being very interesting, we’ll see, but
also very precise—no doubt, he removes it from its context… perhaps, perhaps it’s that he wants
to highlight the fold of poetry and that of music; perhaps he wants to highlight something about
the poem-music relationship. It’s not about adding something to Mallarmé’s poems, which
weren’t lacking anything—Boulez is the first to realize it and to say it… Ah yes! It may be an
operation, then, that would consist in a little folding—why? To what end? Maybe if we get a
handle on that, we’ll have no problem jumping ahead, we’ll be able to jump ahead and recall
some things Heidegger told us about the nature of the fold, since Heidegger’s the one who made
the fold a philosophical concept. Which would let us come back to Foucault who, when he gets
his hands on the notion of the fold, maybe handles it in another way that, by the way, wasn’t
missed on either Boulez or Heidegger.

                                                                                                     4

So, then I don’t at all know how it’s going to go, if it’s going to work, if we’re going to listen
uh… You’ve chosen certain clips… What do you have in mind? Listen for a bit? And then you
try to explain your selection…?
The presenter: [Inaudible comments] … to make a short presentation…
Deleuze: Okay, yes, yes.
The presenter: Fold by Fold is the title…
Deleuze: You speak loudly… I feel, so we’ll need for you and me to switch places… is that
okay?
The presenter: [Inaudible] … I move there like that, I could….
Deleuze: Okay, yes. But if we can’t see you, we can’t hear you turned around; you can’t really
hear someone from behind. You can do the opposite: have us listen first and then talk after.
Maybe the shock of listening to it is good, too.
The presenter: [Inaudible; he speaks while changing places, hence a long pause, with noise of
chairs and of students]
Deleuze: There, that’s good. [Pause] … We have the right… it’s private, right? It’s private; it’s
not public. Anyway, surely … [Pause, sounds of participants] … And you have every right, if
you find the music too beautiful, we’ll stop there, and we won’t talk anymore since … [Pause]
[Brief interruption of the recording]
The presenter: We will begin with the first piece of [inaudible words]
Deleuze: “The Gift”, that is!
The presenter: The first piece, “The Gift of the poem”, from Mallarmé’s poem.
Deleuze: Right. For those who know Mallarmé, I’ll remind you, it’s “I bring you the child of an
Idumean night” … [Pause] For those who don’t know this, [inaudible remark] … [Pause
[First movement: The Gift] [See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W56pQqEVetA] [18:5234:10]
The presenter: So, this was the first movement. [Pause] … [indistinct words] a musical portrait
of Mallarmé, [indistinct words] … This is a movement with a rather complicated genesis.
[indistinct words; details on the development of this movement in the work]
[He then explains the musical and orchestral construction of the first movement as well as some
details about the score] … It’s already deliberately structured by Pierre Boulez [indistinct words]
… So, the first page can be considered as a page of declaration, in the first chord [indistinct
words] …
So, the first verse, the first poem [indistinct words] … It’s the only time where Boulez allowed
for us to hear the text perfectly to such an extent that there are [indistinct words] … The singer

                                                                                                      5

has the choice between talking in a low voice or [indistinct words] [Pause] … first part which
shows his interest in leaving some room for chance, for the aleatory. [indistinct words] … And
there, Boulez separated the three groups from one another, [indistinct words] … [He describes
the function of each group, first the middle one, then the lower, then the upper] the much more
eventful upper group with more agitated interventions. [indistinct words] … That poses
enormous problems of [indistinct word] the score as the conductor [indistinct words] …
Boulez [indistinct word] enormously the different modes [indistinct words] of instruments. He is
looking for the tones and sonorities of instruments for the way that Mallarmé sought out
sonorities in words, [indistinct words] [He gives several details about the use of the instruments’
different capabilities within this process, with a reading of each instrument’s role in the
movement]
A student: Did Boulez try to work with three sound groups or with [indistinct words] …, and
what was the need for that? [Laughter; pause]
The presenter: I think that the need came from the fact that Boulez did not want a fixed
organization like … [Pause] So, I’ll try to talk to you about this afterwards. [Pause]
[indistinct words] [He comments on the strong role of the piano] … and this part ends on a
fermata [indistinct words] … and then we move on to the soprano’s return in the movement. So,
there are so many verses here that aren’t borrowed from the poem, but only fragments [indistinct
words] … Here as well, a good deal is left up to the soloist’s prerogative since [indistinct words]
… and in the obligatory borrowings, she sometimes can choose between several solutions and
it’s normally up to the instrumentalist to decide, up to the prerogative of soloist [indistinct
words] …
The references are, in order, first, to the sonnet corresponding to “Improvisation III”, second, to
the sonnet corresponding to “Improvisation II”, and third, to the sonnet corresponding to
“Improvisation I”, and several pages further on, toward the end of this movement [indistinct
words] … And “The Gift” ends with a third and final part which, there again, calls on the
[indistinct word] choice of the conductor. The orchestra is divided in two levels: the upper lever
and the lower level … [Pause; sounds of chairs, interruption in the presenter’s comments]
So, the orchestra is divided in two levels: the upper lever and the lower level, and the succession
in the [indistinct words] … in five parts: A B C D E. So that gives us: in the upper part A B C D
E [he writes on the board] and within this part [indistinct words], the conductor chooses the
trajectory that he wants to take. Then, basically, there are some rules that intervene, that is, the
whole of the [indistinct words] … necessarily, and the succession of letters in a line should be
respected, that is, well, you can play A B; then, if you want to leave this line and go to A, you’re
required to eventually work back up to C, but you can’t get to D or E. Thus, if one wants to
[indistinct word], you’re forced to go back down to B, you can eventually play BC and climb up
to D, and the two E parts are required to be played together. So, Boulez determined six possible
trajectories by leaving it up to the conductor to choose which trajectory to carry out.6

                                                                                                    6

Deleuze: I would just like…a side note… if you’ll let me? You find it…and you’ll find this
everywhere in contemporary music—the blending of two sorts of rules. I’m trying to connect
back up with our discussion. You constantly find in contemporary music the blending of actually
binding rules with optional rules. On several points he’s already laid out certain rules for the
singer: she can speak the lyric, she can sing it… There you have a very good example where you
have a blend of rules in which some are binding, and some are optional. And that, in current
music—I’m also thinking of [Luciano] Bério, for example—you find… Recall how, in a
completely different context, of course, in Foucault, there is this game of binding rules and
optional rules even at the level of statements. Yet this is a beautiful case of musical statements
that present this complex of rules very different from each other. And that’s all I wanted to add…
The presenter: In Boulez’s work, in fact, optional rules are used, not in all of his works, but
[indistinct words] he uses [indistinct words] … pure chance [indistinct words] …
Deleuze: Yes, never! Never.
The presenter: … in any event, to preserve the conductor’s or the soloist’s ability to choose, to
make a certain number of possible choices, and I think that [indistinct words] … but the choice
should be determined by a person; it’s not the intervention of pure chance [indistinct words] …
Deleuze: And it’s forced, eh? The difference—you’re absolutely right—the difference between
Boulez and [John] Cage in this regard, it’s required; there can’t be pure chance… [Interruption
of the recording] [55:37]

Part 3
Deleuze: What’s funny is that, at the same time, he moves back closer to Cage; this represents
Boulez’s step towards… reunion with Cage.
A student: Can I ask a question?
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes!
The student: [indistinct words] When the soloist comes in, how can one know … [indistinct
words]
The presenter: So, at the moment when there are [indistinct words] … the soprano comes back
here, and on the previous page, Boulez marked [indistinct words] … in other words, the whole
orchestra is then led by the conductor. So, at that point, the hierarchical organization can be
respected. And then, when it comes to the soprano’s intervention, [Pause] she takes syllables
from verses [indistinct words] ... And there, she has a choice to make between three columns A,
B, C … So, she has two required concerns: she must choose three syllables in the same column,
either AAA, BBB, or CCC. But she has to distribute them… over time in two [indistinct words]
... [Pause] She has an optional insert [indistinct words] … [Pause]
The student: [indistinct words]

                                                                                                   7

The presenter: So, when she sings, she of course has her own line with precise notes to be
sung…
The student: Her line is independent?
The presenter: Her line is independent. So there, the orchestra is no longer divided in blocs but is
reunited, and at that point, there is [indistinct words] … a resonance that supports the soprano’s
voice, at least makes the words more intelligible—not a lot, but more so than with the whole
orchestra performing scattered sounds [indistinct words] … would mask the soprano’s voice.
The student: [indistinct words]
The presenter: To a certain extent, yes—ultimately, I’d say yes. In the end, one would have to
ask Boulez [indistinct words] …
The student: [indistinct words]
The presenter: I don’t know, [Pause] that might be less clear, since the structures aren’t the
same; there, it is the lyrics that intervene and… [indistinct word] of the soprano, whereas
previously, the music is written out entirely, there aren’t [indistinct words] … movement
between the three blocks, and in each case, [indistinct words] … [Pause] I was thinking that
eventually there are [indistinct words] … to make some remarks about … [He explains to
Deleuze what he hoped to present next]
Deleuze: I’d like to… we don’t have unlimited time, I mean, unfortunately; I’d almost like for
you to choose another piece, if it were possible, another passage… Myself, I’m struck by this
morning’s questions on the singer’s role that I think you only partially answered, since there are
actually several instances in what you played for us… where the words… the point is that she
casts words, and there are [types of] word-casting with very different functions uh… already it
seems to me, in what you said and what you played for us, there is a lot… there is a lot to reflect
on. So, I’d almost like, if you wouldn’t mind, for you to do the same thing, only with another
piece. For you to forget those who are already interested or familiar, or what you can gather from
reading Mallarmé’s poems, and so on. We’ll say what we have to for the books, the book that
will help you, and so on… not difficult. So, we’ll act a little as though it said something
differently to everyone. So, you take either “The Tomb,”7 if you like, or something of… an
“Improvisation” …
The presenter: I think we would have to listen to an improvisation,
Deleuze: That’s fine, it’s your choice.
The presenter: … regardless, because it’s delicate… we can bring together the orchestral
movements …
Deleuze: Okay, which improvisation?
The presenter: So, “Improvisation I on Mallarmé”…
Deleuze Okay, is it “This virginal long-living lovely day”? That’s right, yes. [Pause]

                                                                                                    8

The presenter: Well, I think it might be best to listen.8 [64:15-64:50]
Deleuze [interrupting the recording]: Uh... could you… could you stop and rewind… is that
possible?
The presenter: From the start?
Deleuze: No, no, no, no! It’s the tempo for me reading the poem because it really changes if
you’ve… I’ll read it plainly, alright, so that you’ll hear the sonorities, otherwise it’s…
[Deleuze reads]
“This virginal long-living lovely day / will it tear from us with a wing’s wild blow / The lost hard
lake haunted beneath the snow / By clear ice-flights that never flew away!
A swan of old remembers it is he/ Superb but strives to break free woebegone / For having left
unsung the territory / To live when sterile winter’s tedium shone.
His neck will shake off this white throe that space / Has forced the bird denying it to face, /
But not the horror of earth that traps his wings.
Phantom imposed this place by his sheer gleam, / He lies immobile in scorn’s frigid dream /
Worn by the Swan dismissed to futile things.”9
There we are… now you might have a better idea… Let’s…
Deleuze: You already grasp—because the poem, “This virginal long-living lovely day,” is
an extraordinary demonstration of voice, at the start…
[Transmission of the Boulez recording: see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I3lK4OJuGKw]
[66 :40-72 :05]
The presenter: So, in this first improvisation, I’m going to try to see to what extent the form of
Mallarmé’s sonnet influenced the improvisation’s musical form. To better [indistinct words] …
of the score according to the organization into quatrains and tercets with interludes between each
[indistinct word]. [Pause]
The divisions aren’t mine; it’s indicated on the score—it’s by Boulez. [He’s writing on the board
as he speaks] The first quatrain, then, he puts at zero. At A, an instrumental interlude, interlude
1. At B, the second quatrain. At C, interlude 2. At D, the tercet. At E, interlude 3. [Pause, sound
of students’ voices speaking] … At F, the second tercet. And at G, one can’t call it an interlude,
but a coda, an instrumental coda. [Pause]
So, the divisions are very clean since, in the interludes, the voice doesn’t intervene at all, at any
time. These are purely instrumental passages. So, if we follow the alternation, we can eventually
divide the piece in two groups—one which would go from zero to C, the other which would go
from D to G—which would each alternate between instrument-and-voice, instruments-only,
instrument-and-voice, instruments-only. There’s the same alternance in the entire [indistinct
word].

                                                                                                   9

That’s one form of the whole piece’s organization. It’s one possible reading, but there are others.
[indistinct words] … One can see the different parts as organized by tempo as a determining
mode of organization. So, [indistinct words] … A B C D E F G [he draws on the board] So, at
the top, to in moderate A; in B, very moderate; in C, very slow; in D, again, not too slow;
[Pause] in E, moderate; [Pause]; in F, not too slow; and in G, very slow.
Then, with one exception, one could have another mode of organization, which would be the
following: [indistinct words; he describes a different organization of rhythms] [Pause] So, the
different parts [indistinct words] … Next, if someone is working on the instrumentation of the
different parts, work undertaken by Dominique [indistinct name] in his work on Boulez,
[indistinct words] … to distinguish four possible modes of instrumentation: he called the first
alpha, instrumental [indistinct word] composed of [indistinct words] …; instrumentation beta
which has vibraphone and harp in A, and vibraphone, harp, and gong in E; and instrumentation
gamma is the most instrumental, without [indistinct words] …
So, if we drew up a third schema… can I erase one? [indistinct words] [Pause; he draws a new
schema] … So, this organization would allow us to see the arch shape, rather traditional in
[indistinct words] … [Pause] By taking middle part, C, as the peak of the arch, as the form’s
culminating point, which is equally in relation with [indistinct words] … At this point, let’s still
consider Part C as a coda, something not contradicted by the [indistinct word] of the score; it’s
starting from [indistinct word] that the tempo becomes important, [indistinct words] … So, these
different forms aren’t… they coexist. All readings are possible, [indistinct words] … the
plurality of discourse that emerges. [Pause]
A student: [indistinct words]
The presenter: [indistinct words]
The student: That—it’s called improvisation”?
The presenter: It’s called “Improvisation I on Mallarmé”.
The student: [indistinct words]
The presenter: No, no, no, [indistinct words] … no room for randomness. Well, what it is, it’s
that there are effectively two versions. A first version was presented in concert [indistinct words]
… The grand version [indistinct words] … by Boulez so that it pairs with “Improvisation III”
when the work is played in its [indistinct words] … In that case, there’s a correspondence. The
first movement corresponds to “Tombeau” [fifth movement], “Improvisation I” goes with
“Improvisation III” [indistinct words] …, and “Improvisation II” would be the center of the form
[i.e. the arch]. But there isn’t any room for randomness.
The student: [indistinct words]
The presenter: Randomness [indistinct words] … [Pause]
Deleuze: I think that seems like enough, right? You’ve given us a very rich subject. A lot to think
about.

                                                                                                10

The presenter: [indistinct words; he explains something regarding the presentation he’d
planned]
Deleuze: Yeah, thankfully, because, if you had, it’s not what I wanted, in any case; what I
wanted was for… nobody wanted that.
The presenter: That gives us something to think about…
Deleuze: Yeah, that’s exactly what I had in mind, and I think you did it very, very well, that is,
we are all… thanks to you, we have material where we can… I wouldn’t dare say “analyze in a
different way”—neither is it a question of analyzing it philosophically—but [we can] think about
the subject with which I began: Fold by Fold. I’d almost say that we have a good case here,
thanks to you.
But where are the folds? And what does it mean to “fold”? And what does it mean to “unfold”?
What does “fold by fold” mean? What do “fold and unfold” mean as artistic or philosophical
gestures? Personally, you know, it occurred to me, while I was listening, that somebody might be
able to—it’s not my thing, I mean—but really, I wondered whether a Heideggerian could
comment along these lines on Heidegger’s main take on the fold and the unfold; in other words,
he could render it as a musical presentation. It should exist, after all, because some Heideggerian
musicians uh… He is very close… I mean, a comparison between a great musician, for example,
[Karlheinz] Stockhausen with Heidegger, would be as valuable as a comparison between Boulez
and Mallarmé. Now, in my opinion, one would be surprised to see that, once again, the fold and
the unfold are presented as creative acts… or something else, other operations, eh, other
operations…. that's what… So, at least you had something to add… thanks to you, we can dwell
a little on this point.
The presenter: Well, this organization [indistinct words] … [He speaks about the organization of
the final movement, “Tombeau”, then connects to another Boulez piece]
Deleuze: Yes, there, we don’t need to hear any more… I mean, with regard to the text you’re
reading, we don’t need to listen to anymore. I mean it’s the text, Points de repère10 … Right, yes,
it’s the same text. Yes. Yes, yes, yes because he did it deliberately. The text is so far from the
music that…
The presenter: [indistinct words]
Deleuze: Right, right.
The presenter: Otherwise, in [indistinct title], there’s an article by Foucault on Boulez.
Deleuze: Ah…. Tell us! Do you have it with you? Give us the rundown. Is it a long article?11
The presenter: No, there’s… a column.
Deleuze: You’ve marked the important passages? Is that it?
The presenter: [indistinct words]

                                                                                                    11

Deleuze: Oh, it’s long. [Laughter] I mean, it’s long, it’s not… [Pause] You’ve read it… you
have… do you have another copy, or is that your copy? Does it say anything essential?
The presenter: In this paragraph, here…
Deleuze: You found it?
The presenter: There’s something
Deleuze: This? This one?
The presenter: Yes, that one. [Pause; Deleuze prepares himself to read]
Deleuze: “During a time in which we were being taught the privileges of meaning, of the lived
through [du vécu], the sensuous [du charnel], of foundational experience [de l’expérience
originaire], subjective contents or social significations…” -- See, this applies to everyone but
especially to phenomenology -- “[…] to encounter Boulez and music was to see the twentieth
century from an unfamiliar angle—that of the long battle…” – Hey, a theme very dear to
Foucault… -- “that of the long battle around the ‘formal.’ It was to recognize how in Russia, in
Germany, in Austria, in Central Europe, through music, painting, architecture, or philosophy,
linguistics, and mythology, the work of the formal had challenged the old problems and
overturned the ways of thinking. A whole history of the formal in the twentieth century remains
to be done: attempting to measure it as a power of transformation, drawing it out as a force for
innovation and a locus of thought, beyond the images or the ‘formalism’ behind which some
people tried to hide it.” -- He’s telling us that this formal is less formal than it seems -- “And also
recounting its difficult relations with politics” – Alright -- “We have to remember that it was
quickly designated, in Stalinist or fascist territory, as enemy ideology and detestable art.” --
That’s funny -- “Boulez only needed a straight line, without any detour or mediation, to go to
Stéphane Mallarmé, to Paul Klee, to René Char, to Henri Michaux, and later to Cummings.
Often a musician goes to painting, a painter to poetry, a playwright to music, via an
encompassing figure and through a universalizing aesthetic. […] Boulez went directly from one
point to another, from one experience to another, drawn by what seemed to be not an ideal
kinship but the necessity of a conjuncture…”12 That’s curious, eh? I think it’s a text of…
transition from Foucault—what year is this?
The presenter: ’82.
Deleuze: ’82? That was quick! [Laughter] Let’s check… it’d be better for my case if it were ’72.
[Laughter]
The presenter: ’82.
Deleuze: Okay, okay… You don’t always get what you want… So, there you have it. I’d like for
you all to bear with me, in these final musings, since we’re putting everything together. This bit
about music with Boulez, this folding business with Heideggerian ontology, this story… the
movement of the fold and unfold in Foucault, with all the problems that entails… This article
recalls the problem of thought’s relationship with art, with a possible glimpse at painting also…

                                                                                                       12

How do we sort it out? We aren’t even looking for coherence. First thing… uh, my first
comment, is how I see it. The fold—I wouldn’t say that it’s a metaphor, but I would say that it’s
a strong term. I don’t know if it’s metaphorical or not. It’s a strong term in… And how does it
appear? What does the fold involve? As I see it, it’s that the fold concerns something that’s
hidden at first glance. [Pause]
What does the folding? What does the folding is something that conceals and that folds in order
to conceal. In this sense, it’s not only the curtain that will fold, it’s not only the lace that will fold
like a so-called pleated curtain. But (even) the dust, the fog will fold. And after all, one of
Mallarmé’s problems was that of presence and absence, an invocation to the fold, you’ll find it
everywhere. Just like you constantly see lace, the fog, the fan that folds and unfolds. The
movement of being folded, or the movement of folding and unfolding, is fundamental. And, if
Boulez’s piece is called Fold by Fold, it’s due to a poem by Mallarmé of which I’ll read the first
stanza: “At times” that is, at certain times… “At times, when no breath stirs it…”13
“At times, when no breath stirs it, all / The almost incense-hued antiquity / As I feel widowed
stone let her veils fall / Fold by fold furtively and visibly / Floats or seems not to bring its proof
unless / By pouring time out as an ancient balm.”
That’s it. Fold by fold, all the commentaries will tell you, but we can’t say, then, that we’re still
dealing with the poem… what does that mean? It concerns Bruges, the famous city in Belgium,
uh… and at times… at times, when no breath stirs it… That is, when there isn’t yet any wind, to
put it plainly, early in the morning, before there is any wind. Well, there is the fog, which
dissipates. The fog dissipates and “all the almost incense-colored antiquity,” that is, the
“widowed stone,” that is, Bruges. Bruges the dead, Bruges the widow, begins to emerge as the
fog’s folds come undone.
I mean… and at the same time, they “come to be” [se font] — what “comes to be”, right, the fog,
you see, in certain hollows or at certain times, you have the impression that its folds come down
just like the folds in a curtain. And that already takes us to something we cannot avoid… they’re
fundamentally linked, the fold and something we see… what, that we see through the fold, to the
extent that the fold comes undone… I don’t know what it’d require… We’d have to find just the
right formula. Well, in relation to the fold or in the fold, something unfolds. If we say that,
we’ve already stopped considering the fold and the unfold as two opposites. In the fold,
something unfolds; Bruges emerges. In the fold of the fog, Bruges emerges.
A short work by Thomas de Quincey, famous 19th century English author, was recently
translated, where there are… everyone has their favorite lines—I read it: a story about an Asian
people, then a part of the Russian empire, who emigrate, who all pick up and leave, a big tribe…
all leave the Russian empire and head back east. And the text is sublime. It’s called The Revolt of
the Tartars. Editor: Actes Sud. And, in the end, we’re shown the place where they’re going to
reach, through the catastrophes, they’ve overcome every catastrophe, and they arrive, and we see
them arrive. We seem them arrive at their refuge. Listen to what it says: “There arose a vast,
cloudy vapor.”14 “There arose a vast, cloudy vapor […]. Through the next hour, during which the
gentle morning breeze had a little freshened, the dusty vapor had developed itself far and wide

                                                                                                                     13

into the appearance of huge aerial draperies…” “Through the next hour, during which the gentle
morning breeze had a little freshened, the dusty vapor had developed itself far and wide into the
appearance of huge aerial draperies, hanging in mighty volumes from the sky to the earth; and at
particular points, where the eddies of the breeze acted upon the pendulous skirts of these aerial
curtains, rents were perceived…”15
[End of the recording; given that this de Quincey text continues (see session 11 from the seminar
on Leibniz and the Baroque) and also since Deleuze usually makes a final remark announcing
the end of each session, it is possible that some of the recording is missing] [1:41:54]

Notes

    This was Deleuze’s response to a comment by Georges Comtesse the previous week, May 20, 1986.
 “Conceptual design” is a common translation for this phrase but given Deleuze’s frequent description of
philosophy as a creative endeavor, “creation” might be more appropriate.
  The title is taken from a Mallarmé poem, “Remémoration d'amis belges”, of which Boulez makes no direct use. In
the poem, the poet describes how a mist that covers the city of Bruges gradually disappears. Let us note that while
we provide the translation of “pli selon pli” as “fold by fold”, the Tom Conley translation of this title and phrase in
The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque is “fold after fold”.
 The composition is in five movements, the first and last using a line from a Mallarmé poem, the three middle
movements using the entire text of a Mallarmé sonnet. The movements and their associated poems are: Don – "Don
du poème"; Improvisation I sur Mallarmé – "Le vierge, le vivace et le bel aujourd'hui" ; Improvisation II sur
Mallarmé – "Une dentelle s'abolit" ; Improvisation III sur Mallarmé – "A la nue accablante tu" ; Tombeau –
Mallarmé’s poem of the same name. See also the discussion of Mallarmé, that this discussion in many ways
prepares and announces, in session 9 of the Leibniz and the Baroque seminar, February 3, 1987.
 This refers to a commemorative poem (or “tombeau”) written on January 10, 1897, following the death of
Verlaine.
 While the translation follows the text as transcribed, Deleuze and the presenter, in particular, refer to sheet music
and/or other diagrams/notation of Boulez’s composition. Emily Adamowicz’s dissertation offers an excellent
account of the “rotational array” described above; her work is replete with helpful diagrams and musical notation.
Cf. Emily J. Adamowicz, “A Study of Form and Structure in Pierre Boulez’s Pli selon Pli,” Electronic Thesis and
Dissertation Repository 3133 (2015).
    This refers to the fifth movement of Boulez’s composition, one of several by Mallarmé.
 This is Boulez’s « Improvisation 1 on Mallarmé” corresponding to the Mallarmé poem that Deleuze reads
immediately after.
 Stéphane Mallarmé, Collected Poems and Other Verse, trans. E.H. and A.M. Blackmore, introduction by Elizabeth
McCombie (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 66-69.
     Presumably this refers to Pierre Boulez, Points de repère (Paris: Christian Bourgois, 1981).
  The selections that follow defer to Robert Hurley’s translation of the article, including his bracketed translation
notes. See Michel Foucault, “Pierre Boulez, Passing Through The Screen,” trans. Robert Hurley, in Essential Works

                                                                                                                       14

of Foucault vol. 2: Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology, ed. James D. Faubion (New York: The New Press, 1998),
241-244. The original text, "Pierre Boulez, l’écran traversé", appeared in a collection edited by M. Colin, J.-P.
Leonardini, et J. Markovits, Dix ans et après. Album souvenir du festival d’automne (Paris: Messidor, 1982), pp.
232-236; see also Dit et Écrits IV (Paris : Gallimard, 1994), pp. 219-222.
     See the Hurley translation, pp. 242-243.
   Mallarmé, 59-61. Translation slightly modified to accommodate Deleuze’s reading: e.g., “fold by fold” where the
translator has it “fold on fold,” to reflect the typical translation for the title of Boulez’s piece. See note 3 on other
variations of this expression.
  Reading the original English, one sees that Deleuze appears to omit nearly a page separating the arrival of the dust
cloud and the line which begins “Through the next hour.” Cf. William Edward Simonds, De Quincey’s Revolt of the
Tartars, Edited with Introduction and Notes (Boston: Athenaeum, 1899), 53-54. The ostensible omission is indicated
in brackets; see also the analysis that Deleuze will present of this text in session 11 of the seminar on Leibniz and
the Baroque, March 3, 1987.
     The French translation, which Deleuze reads here, has “the pendulous skirts” as “les plis.”