1

Gilles Deleuze

Painting and the Question of Concepts

Session 8, 2 June 1981

Transcriptions: Voix de Deleuze, Part 1, Julien Paris et Dalila Sellami (duration 1 :07 :09);
Parts 2, 3 & 4 Emray Ilaf ; correction : Christine Spianti (duration 1 :11 :00) ; time stamp
and additional revisions, Charles J. Stivale

Translated by Billy Dean Goehring

Part 1
[While we follow the Paris 8 section breaks, we indicate additional breaks for convenience’s
sake]

Today we should... we should just, well, not finish... but we should lay down some guidelines for
this problem with color. So, that’s what I’d like.

Incidentally, I’d really like to see if they have enough time at the end, and if they’re here—Paul,
uh, Paul Tolli, Paul Tolli… See me, Paul, if you have time, okay? Traumer—is Traumer here?
The one who gave me, who sent me a paper on Goethe, Treve… See me later, alright? Uh, Le
Tortois. LeTortois is here, okay. Michèle d’Albin? Michèle d’Albin isn’t here? And uh, Ms.
Petitjean? Is Ms. Petitjean here? You’ll come see me later?

Anyway… So it’s still very complicated—it’s very complicated… It’s so complicated because
this is precisely our problem—where we ended up last time. It’s precisely that there is… We’ll
put it this way, based on everything we’ve done before, we’ll put it this way, alright: there are
regimes of color… Not only are there colors, but there are regimes of color.1

That already gives us two options: regimes of color can accompany the spaces we saw
previously, the sign-spaces we saw previously and the modulations characteristic of these
spaces… Or else a whole other problem, a whole other aspect: aren’t there regimes of color
which themselves constitute a sign-space and which are subject to their own modulation?

As a result, things are already a bit shaky, eh? Since by introducing this—for now—very vague
notion of “regimes of color” (in the plural), there would be regimes of color that one could
identify practically, historically, theoretically, scientifically. But these being unequal, there
would be a correspondence between the scientific determination of regimes of color, the practical
determination, the historical determination. There’d only be a series of correspondences.

But to start with, I see two options for regimes of color: Either they’ll correspond to a signalspace and to a modulation defined by other means… Or else they will themselves make up a
colorist, coloristic space and a chromatic modulation all their own. And color is probably capable
of uh… is capable of both?

                                                                                                    2

As a result, what would this be? How would one define a “color-regime”? The point is that a
color regime doesn’t mean that all the colors…it means a certain treatment of color…What is
coherent about a treatment such that it’d make us say, “Ah, yes, here we have a ‘color-regime’”?
And what would these “color-regimes” be?

Well, I’d want to define them in three ways… according to three characteristics… No, four
characteristics:

First, for there to be a color-regime, the ground needs to be determined in one way or other…
“the ground”… The ground isn’t necessarily determined by color. You might see how a colorregime will imply its own coloristic space and chromatic modulation… if the ground itself is
colored. But a color-regime might very well adhere to another sort of space, to another sort of
modulation… So, the idea of the ground, which is so fundamental in painting—the ground will
be the first requirement for a color-regime to satisfy.

But what does “ground” mean, exactly? A ground—and I find the notion very interesting—is
twofold; it’s a twofold concept. On one hand, the ground refers to so-called “support”. What
supports line and color is the ground. That is the first established definition. As in when you talk
about… a plaster ground… or a chalk ground2 … or a colored ground, fine. And it’s in this, you
see, that our system must constantly include echoes. I’m saying immediate echoes3 in the history
of painting. For example, you have grounds from the 15th to the 16th century, well-known
grounds being researched and gradually perfected, formulas for plaster, so-called “slaked”
plaster4 in particular, and which will serve as the painting’s ground, that is, they’ll determine the
quality of the support.

But at the same time, the notion of ground refers to something else: the background, but not just
any background, not in just any regard. On the one hand, the ground is the support’s determinate
quality; it’s the determination of the support, and on the other hand, it’s not exactly the
background, but it’s the determination of the background’s value, the determination of “variable”
value of the background. It’s the very nature of the ground qua quality of the support which, in a
way, will engender the relative position of the background.

What does “the relative position of the background” mean? Well, we saw it in the sign-spaces we
examined earlier. Renaissance painting implies -- this is too general, but as we’ve seen, you can
always tweak it -- Renaissance painting implies a background position subject to the
foreground’s requirements. 17th century painting, in a way, implies a sort of reversal, a shift in
values in the sense that everything emerges from the background; and by Byzantine painting,
things had already shifted in favor of the background. So, I’d say that the ground is both the
quality of the support and the variable position of the background. That would be the first
characteristic of a regime of color, what is the ground like?

The second characteristic: What then is the role of color in the modulation, in the modulation
taking place on the surface supported by the ground? We’ve already covered the different types
of modulation.

                                                                                                     3

The third characteristic of regimes of color: it’s the character of the hues.5 That is, a regime of
color implies a certain privilege – provided that we clarify later what I mean by “privilege” --
privileging a type of hue. What is a type of hue? You could say that a type of hue is actually very
simple, you see. There are two variables in color; we’ve been over it, I’m back to the schema that
I asked you to, to reflect on the kind of terminological schema.6 First, a color can be light or
dark. Second, it can be saturated or washed-out. It’s a bit like with alcohol, if you will. For
example, it’s a bit—the distinction is quite simple, you see—like the distinction between titration
and dilution; anyone who drinks alcohol knows it, but even those who don’t drink. It isn’t hard to
understand. You have an alcohol of 40%. You dilute it; your 40% alcohol is still 40% alcohol.
It’s diluted 40% alcohol. If you absorb it undiluted, it’s saturated 40% alcohol. See,
saturated/watered-down… saturated/diluted forms a pair consisting of color—it’s the “purity”
factor.

From there, you combine that with the pair light/dark: a hue might be light or dark, saturated or
washed-out, that is, diluted. Combine both pairs, [and] the possible combinations will give you
the types of hue. The first possibility, light / washed-out… is “pale.” Light / saturated, the second
possibility, light / saturated… are bright hues, “bright.” Dark / saturated: these are the “deep”
hues. Dark / desaturated: these are the “muted” hues.7

I’d say a regime of color implies the dominance of one of these types of hue. I’d, then I’d say:
very well, we can imagine “pale” regimes… “bright” regimes, “deep” regimes, “muted” regimes.
Alright, but what’s this about “privilege,” “dominance”? What does that mean? It’s very simple.
It doesn’t mean that most of the colors will be—in “pale” regimes, for example, it doesn’t mean
that most of the colors will be pale hues; that might be true, but I’m thinking of something else
entirely.

Again, everything I’m saying—especially today, right—might be wrong. Fix it; don’t just
modify it, but correct it for yourselves, yes, because… It’s not necessary that all the hues be
pale—or see, there aren’t more of them. I mean something else, that… The “pale” matrix… pale
hues will be the way in which, in accordance with the ground, in such a regime—it’s not always
like this—in such a regime, when I talk about a “pale” regime, I mean that the pale hues will be
the way in which, depending on the ground, all of the colors—including the “bright,” including
the “deep,” including the “muted”—are distributed. So, it’s not at all a sign of frequency; it’s a
sign of importance, the importance of the pale hues, negotiating between the colors and the
ground.

A “bright” regime doesn’t mean there won’t be any “muted” hues. Sometimes there aren’t muted
hues in a “bright” regime. For example, the Impressionists avoid muted hues. Okay. But there
can be some; it’s just that these hues, the colors in general, and the ground, will be negotiated by
the bright hues. At that point, it’d be a “bright” regime. So, I could add this third criterion to the
other two.

Finally, the last criterion for regimes of color is that—this time I’m looking for a scientific, or
quasi-scientific, parallel. You haven’t forgotten that our problem is always one of analogy. Since
we wanted to define analogy by just modulation and not— and not at all as conveying

                                                                                                           4

resemblance -- so… so, then… how, scientifically…? What does colorimetry have to say about
how color is reproduced? It comes down to analogy.

You see a color; you reproduce it. How do you reproduce a color? We’re told three things: that
there’d be three different methods. I’m wondering whether these three methods—you see what I
mean, these three methods, these scientific approaches -- won’t they have a practical equivalent
and an historical equivalent, you know, tying everything together?

In the first approach… You’re looking at a complex beam of light. Not simple, not
monochromatic, not of a single color—a complex beam. How do you reproduce it? One of
colorimetry’s basic principles is that every complex beam, or every complex luminous flux, can
in principle be reduced to a white beam accompanied by a monochromatic beam.

Hence the formula: f -- I’m getting this from some dictionary… I mean, it’s very… uh… hold
onto these formulas because I’d like to tease out, you’ll need to have them in mind… if we’re
going to draw anything from them -- the formula is: f – that is, the complex luminous flux, the
colored flux, of a given color, equals: f (T) f (little d, up top, right? As a coefficient—little d) + f
(little w).8

What this formula means is very simple: f is the complex flux of light of a given color; f w is
“flux of white light”—the w refers to the English; + f d is the monochromatic beam whose
wavelength is l(d)… l(d), the “dominant wavelength”.

Basically, see, the beam’s wavelength f -- mark it “little l” -- and then you have the formula f
(little l) = f (w) + f (l(d)).9 You’ve replaced your complex beam with a beam of white light,
combined with a monochromatic beam whose wavelength is different uh… from what you
started with. That’s the so-called dominant wavelength method. What’s more, in some cases, in
some cases, your monochromatic, dominant wavelength beam cannot itself be included in the
reconstruction of the original beam. Moreover, this first combination, obviously, right, to put it
another way, is: flux of white light plus a monochromatic beam, and… that can, in principle,
recreate any complex beam. That’s the first method. Hang onto that, okay? Because we’re going
to need it.

The second method. Why a second method? Because the first method is very, very theoretical.
You’d have to be able to determine very precisely… [Interruption of the recording] [21:28]

… of three primary colors, three primary colors. In the previous case, the color matrix started
with white. Here, on the other hand, it’s based on a tricolor system. What are the three primary
colors? They are: blue, red, green. Why blue, red, green? You’ll recognize these from TV
screens. Why blue, red, green? You’d think it would be blue, red, yellow! It’s simply because
you cannot render a complex beam with blue, red, yellow. Why not? Such rendering requires that
the three primary colors be such that none of them can be “counterbalanced” by the other two.
So, if you go with yellow, blue, red, you’d have a chance of counterbalancing red with yellow
and blue. So, it isn’t possible; your three primary colors, then, will be: red, green, blue. There are
some remarkable paintings in [Nicolas] de Staël’s work; there’s a landscape that’s really

                                                                                                     5

something. Under the title “Agrigente,” a landscape with an area, I’ve forgotten the exact
breakdown, in only three colors plus black and white. Those three colors: red, green, blue.

Well, this method, no longer a dominant wavelength method which privileges white, is a method
known as “additive mixing.” It corresponds to the formula: any given flux f, any colored flux,
equals f r, red flux, plus f g, green flux, plus f b, blue flux.10 Okay, last we come to… [Deleuze
does not complete the sentence]

Third, the third possible method, only now we’re switching domains: this time we have to move
away from the ray of light and onto the colored body, whether pigments or filters. What
happens? What happens in a filter? What is the color of a body? You already know that a body’s
color is precisely the color that the body doesn’t absorb. It’s the color that the body reflects,
diffuses, or transmits. Why are plants green? The standard answer, as in the Larousse, is that
plants are green because they absorb red, because chlorophyll absorbs red (light); they are green
because they absorb red; chlorophyll absorbs red and so reflects green.

Alright, you can imagine, then, mixtures of pigment, a synthesis of pigments, but what is this
synthesis? Either yellow pigments absorbing blue and sending yellow or green back to the eye,
or blue pigments -- oh, what did I say? I must have mixed it up… I don’t know -- Yellow
pigment thus absorbs blue and sends back yellow and green. Blue pigments absorb yellow and
send back green and blue. You mix both types of pigment, you’re left with—the blue is
absorbed, the yellow is absorbed, and you’re left with a purely green reflection.

What do you call this mixture, or this synthesis? This synthesis will be “subtractive” mixing. It
can’t be done with light rays. Note that subtractive synthesis, subtractive mixing, can produce
whatever you want besides white. How can it render black? If each body absorbs what the others
reflect, then you’ll have black. So, there can be black with subtractive synthesis or subtractive
mixing, but you can’t have white. Those, then, are my three scientific formulas from colorimetry,
the simple version.

Well, but we forget, we forget these formulas from colorimetry; it doesn’t matter when. My
question—listen carefully for the nuance—is whether those working in the pictorial arts haven’t
already been working with regimes of color. The last criterion for a regime is the means of
reproducing color. We’ll stop there, since it gets too abstract.

That’s how I’d first define a regime of color—I need the time; don’t you have a watch?
[Someone passes him a watch] -- I would define a regime of colors by four characteristics, four
characteristics. First, by the state of the ground in both senses of the word: as determination of
the support—the modification of the support—and as the variable position of the background.
Second, by a corresponding modulation. Third, by a hue privileged among the four primary
types: bright, pale, muted, deep. By one of the three primary means of reproducing color: the
dominant wavelength method, compared to a white flux; the method of additive synthesis; the
method of subtractive mixing.

                                                                                                       6

That being said, it’s a good thing that I went over it again, since my second characteristic
actually disappears, since modulation is included in the last characteristic. So, in fact there are
only three characteristics. There—whew—a short break… [Interruption of the recording] [30:34]

… Here we are. Yes, alright? Alright. Then I’ll come back to my problem… If it’s true that we
can define regimes of colors, sometimes these regimes of color can refer to previously defined
spaces and to previously defined modulations, sometimes they refer to a space peculiar to color
and to a chromatic modulation that we haven’t yet defined.

Well, let’s look at a bit of history, the history of painting. I’ll try to define a “Renaissance”
regime of colors, for example. We’ll see how it turns out—if we can get to a little bit of
technique, but really in the interest of our examination into regimes of color -- would there be a
“Renaissance” regime of color, with so many exceptions, so many problems? That’s how life
goes with the history of painting. And well, yes! I think there is a regime of colors, but—as
we’ve just described it, and no doubt there’s more to say—but what’s famous about Renaissance
painting is the use of “white” grounds.

So fine, white grounds, let’s start from there; that might bring us back to our first colorimetric
formula, but we can’t push it too far, since they did it as painters, in practice—not as scientists.
They use white grounds; what does that mean? It means that the support is coated with a layer of
plaster, a special plaster, a plaster treated in a special way, or with a rather thick layer of chalk—
what’s going on there?

Now, there is a painter known—important for the history of painting—there is a painter known
for having perfected this system, and well before the Renaissance—that is, the Renaissance took
up something long in the making; it’s just that this particular painter was a turning point between
the Renaissance and what came before. It’s the great Van Eyck, to the point that—Van Eyck’s
secret formula is a common fixture in the history of painting—and Van Eyck’s secret starts with
the use of so-called slaked plaster11 as a ground. Van Eyck died around 1440—I’m pulling from
the dictionary—1440, that is, before the birth of Leonardo da Vinci but not by much; Leonardo
da Vinci was born in 1452. There’s a recent book of criticism that puts a lot of emphasis on Van
Eyck and considers Van Eyck as a painter among painters—everyone’s free to choose their own
painter among painters, but this time it’s based precisely on this mysterious white ground…
because there’s a lot involved in this white ground: actually, obtaining slaked plaster involved a
whole process with plaster and glue, so the “pharmacy” of painting, the “chemistry” of painting,
became a real concern.

It’s Xavier de Langlais, Xavier de Langlais, who wrote a very interesting book, with
Flammarion, called The Technique of Oil Painting, and it’s terrific; it’s a joy to read.12 It’s funny
because it’s a very particular sort of criticism you can find in every artistic discipline. I think it’s
literally—uh, you could call it, uh, reactionary, uh, but in a good way. You’ll see what I mean by
good reactionary. It’s someone who halts who halts development at a certain point and says “No,
no, stop there, we’re done, it’s all downhill from here!” Know what I mean…? They’re
delightful, actually [Laughter] — “This is the cut-off point”, but on second thought, actually, on
second thought: “But there was still Mozart.” He wasn’t so bad… Ha [Laughter] No, so in
music, for example, there are many fans like this of Gregorian chanting… Bam! “There’s

                                                                                                     7

nothing after Gregorian chanting”—it’s a decline, a slow, slow decline… we shouldn’t joke
because… [Deleuze does not finish the sentence] It happened in philosophy, a happy moment,
with Neo-Thomism— [Jacques] Maritain, he was great, Maritain”: “St. Thomas”, Bam! … After
that, it was hard to… Descartes, “if there was a little St. Thomas in Descartes” [for Maritain], so
much the better.

And you’ll see there was something strange. Sometimes the ones who are frozen in time and
don’t want to bother with anything else turn out to be surprisingly modern, and they are fine —
in two regards — first, they have a lot to teach us about their cut-off point. And that’s easily
explained: they’re so wound up by where they think “it’s all over” that they have a profound
technical knowledge of the period where “everything” stops, after which things decline, so ok.
But to understand what’s going on with Gregorian chanting, you have to ask someone like that.
To understand St. Thomas, you obviously have to ask Maritain. And then everything else is
decadence. As a result, according to them, you’re better off starting from scratch. *

Back to our example, because I’m fascinated by it, the example of Xavier Langlais: he’ll say that
“oil painting reached its height in Van Eyck.” Already in the Renaissance, thanks to the white
ground, thanks to slaked plaster, after which everything fall apart—Already in the Renaissance,
of course, Van Eyck’s secret is maintained, but they already understand it less clearly; things are
already on the decline in the Renaissance, but they nonetheless retained something of the great
Van Eyck, but it’s awful after that… What’s so awful about it? Here we see Xavier de Langlais’s
stubbornness, his personal obsession: craquelure. Paintings crack, so Xavier de Langlais loses his
bearings. Paintings after Van Eyck crack more and more, and he loses it when it comes to really
“cracking” painters. [Laughter] In particular, the punching bag for Xavier de Langlais is an 18th
century English portraitist called [Joshua] Reynolds, since Reynolds—and we’ll see why, in
terms of his regime of color, there’s no avoiding craquelure in Reynolds—but Delacroix gets
contempt from Xavier de Langlais: he doesn’t know how to do his job, as his craquelure
demonstrates…

He bitterly says of the Impressionists that “they had good ideas but no know-how” and that “they
never could solve the problem of ground.” See, I’m coming back to my question about the
regime of color; Xavier de Langlais is someone for whom there is only one regime of color: the
great regime of the dominant wavelength, that is, the white ground.

That’s not bad, but let’s make time for—there has to be something! My God. My God, there is
something… Here you have the first regime of color, I’m thinking of the Renaissance which
holds Van Eyck’s secret, who used it and modified his support by way of “plaster” or “a thick
layer of chalk.” What happens after that? Two phases: on the white ground, they make what’s
called a “underpainting,” and they wash the “underpainting”; the washed underpainting on the
white ground—that’s the second phase; that’s how they work; third phase, they spread and place
the colors… in what way? They put paint down in thin layers.

A quick aside so you’ll understand—you should have understood at the beginning, but if you
didn’t get it at the beginning, that’s fine, you’ll understand later—a quick aside: my first two
phases, white ground, washed underpainting, what does that give you? Of course, it gives you
the formula, “light / washed-out,” what I described as the “privileging of pale hues,” privileging

                                                                                                      8

pale hues. Which doesn’t prevent the third phase; they put down colors—maybe bright colors,
maybe saturated colors, maybe deep colors—but the principle remains: a thin layer of color on a
white ground, such that the white ground peeks through, especially, for example, through
clothing.

The white ground will give the colors luminosity, and as for the shadows—what will they do?
Well then, they’ll saturate the color, the color placed on the ground. They’ll saturate the color;
they’ll go through several layers and one of the first formulas is “color placed on a white ground
over the underpainting,” following the lines of the underpainting—that’s the first formula of socalled “glazing”: a thin layer of color on the ground.13

But although they use the word “glaze,” as a technical term, I’d rather insist on saying “that isn’t
true glazing”; it’s a glaze in a very general sense. We’ll see why I have this reservation; I’ll try to
say why I have reservations. I’d prefer to save—I have every right to—save the word “glaze” for
another regime. Okay.

That’s the first regime. What did I mean by calling it the “Renaissance formula”? What all
painters—well, okay, almost all painters. See, white ground, washed underpainting, glazed color.
That gives me—I’d say I’m justified in saying that—it’s a pale regime even if the pale hues
aren’t dominant, even if there aren’t exclusively pale hues. It’s a pale regime because the
ensemble of colors, whether they’re bright, saturated, deep, what have you, are obtained through
this matrix: white, washed underpainting. Yes, it’s very clear, very clear.

Now what happens here that’ll really belong to the history of the Renaissance? How does that
move painting? What happens is still rather intriguing: painters in the Renaissance who borrow
Van Eyck’s system—in particular, the Italians get it from Flanders, and then we see that through
Italy, it comes back to Flanders and to Holland… very odd route… -- and okay, okay…
something happens: Renaissance painters -- I’m talking about the greats… so it’s not a critique.
For Langlais, that itself is a critique -- they’ll tend to gradually thicken… the white ground. Their
technical prowess hinges on a thickening of the white ground. The white ground becomes a
thicker white, or at least more and more opaque… Very important, if you follow me—it’s the
last sticking point; if you understand this, you’ll understand everything that comes after—in
particular, the truly great painter.

So, it bothers Langlais because, he says, obviously he’s a genius, among the greatest of painters;
he’s a genius—it’s frustrating—and at the same time, his technique is already setting the stage
for decadence. Since it’s no longer the old Van Eyck ground, yet the greatest painter known for
thickening—a visible, considerable thickening—the support’s ground is Titian; the white ground
becomes very, very thick and very opaque. You can sense that this will already be a nascent form
of luminism, that it will really foreshadow certain aspects of the 17th century. The white ground
becomes very opaque. Even Leonardo da Vinci: bizarrely, his plaster seems – “seems”, as
specialists have said -- not really thicker than Van Eyck’s but still more opaque.

It’s interesting how these differences, which really come down strictly to differences in
technique—what will come of making a thicker white ground? A very thick plaster? It has some

                                                                                                    9

strange consequences; it appears to result in two things, at least, it seems… it turns out that there
are two results:

The first thing is that washing the ground—diluting with water or with turpentine—the dilution
becomes darker and darker, it’s as though color creeps back into the ground, that is, the colors of
the underpainting will in themselves affect the whole ground; instead of a white ground, as it
gets opaquer and thicker, the white ground starts to take on color—that’s the first major
difference. A pale color, sure, the color is pale… but it is colored.

The second notable difference you need to understand —all else being equal, in both cases, it’s
the work of the painter—the underpainting is under threat, the underpainting stage is under
threat… by what? Underpainting will gradually be replaced by “working impasto” as the ground
gets thicker; and what does it mean to work impasto? It ought to be opposed to the
underpainting.

Working impasto is the method of pentimento, the painter’s pentimento:14 namely, instead of a
well-defined underpainting, after which all that’s left to do is add colors, there’s a perpetual
reworking, working impasto or if necessary, the painter… will rework, at which point, and
starting particularly with Titian, one finds such moving things—the painter’s pentimento—or
when you look very closely or when you look at it scientifically, you see the trace of a
pentimento—for example, in a fifth leg of a horse, the leg that was covered up in order to
reposition its legs.15

So, I’d say that the three -- the Renaissance’s evolution, technically as far as the regime is
concerned -- the regime of the color white, [of] the white ground is distinguished by three things:
a gradual increase in thickness and opacity, grounds are more and more starkly colored, the
substitution of pentimento for underpainting.

Indeed, for someone like Langlais, it’s all quite sad: this thicker plaster… this ground that’s
already colored and absorbs color directly, and abandoning underpainting in favor of working
impasto, and so on—it leads him to think, “Ah, well, yeah—painting has taken a wrong turn…”
If I say he’s nonetheless a modernist, it’s because he’s so convinced that oil painting was already
in decline during the Renaissance that he says: hurray for acrylic paints, hurray for oil-less
paints, for contemporary paints—yes, so… He reverts to being very modernist, saying, “oil
painting is over, so better start over with acrylic, vinyl, and so on”. You know what I mean?
Well, back to what I was saying.

So, this is how I’d define the Renaissance regime: there is a, well, a regime of color—and see,
that’s bound up with everything from before—there’s a regime of color, but by necessity this
regime of color is dedicated to another sort of sign-space and modulation. The sign-space—we
saw—of the Renaissance is the tactile-optical space, defined by the collective line and the
primacy of the foreground. But note that the primacy of the foreground is specifically established
by the white ground. Note that it’s specifically the underpainting that establishes the collective
line—and that doesn’t prevent there being a regime of color, insofar as you “glaze,” or pseudoglaze, whatever your colors might be—that’s what I’d call the “pale” regime of color, dedicated
to Renaissance space, to tactile-optical space, and to the collective line’s modulation.

                                                                                                    10

That’s our first regime of color… alright? Yes? Not too hard?

A student: Very much so!

Deleuze: Very hard… Too hard?

Students: [Various comments, inaudible]

Deleuze: Yes, but it’s hard for me, too… [Laughter] Yes, it is hard. No, it’s…Well, as we make
more progress, maybe it’ll get…

I’ll move on to a second stage, another regime of color; let’s look at another regime of color, one
that risks complicating while also simplifying things—who knows—we’re going to consider the
17th century regimes of color—the 17th century. It’s intriguing, because it seems like, for the
sake of convenience, I was looking for a single—but I couldn’t get around it—one single,
varying trait, and now there are so obviously two, two that’ll form a sort of clamp. Around what?
Well, both of them, around the luminism of the 17th century.

Remember that it still won’t be about a space of pure color; it’ll be a regime of color subject to
what? Subject to the optical space, which is how we defined the 17th century, and relative to the
corresponding modulation, the modulation of light and no longer the modulation of the collective
line. So, the regime of color still doesn’t refer to its own proper coloristic space; it’s dedicated to
another kind of space, the optical space of light. However, it represents a drastic change
compared to the regime of the Renaissance.

A painter emerged at the end of the 16th century who was incredibly important, technically, and
whom sadly, predictably, Xavier de Langlais abhors so much that he doesn’t even talk about
him. Caravaggio—but what does Caravaggio do? What does he invent? The strangest thing: he
invents—of course he had predecessors, you’d have to find them—but he invents the—I can’t
seem to find the right word—He invents the “dark ground,” the pitch ground, or more precisely,
the “red brown” ground, a red brown16 … a red brown ground, right… and what difference does
that make? Then the support is modified by this sort of—how can I put this—of indefinite color.

I’ll emphasize that because when, when [Heinrich] Wölfflin talks about certain aspects of
luminism in the 17th century he says -- oh my! [An object falls in the room] -- exactly that: the
ground is an indefinite color. What does “indefinite color” mean? Well, what matters is that it’s
something indefinite; I can’t say, strictly speaking, it’s this-or-that color but it is some color.
Whereas with the Renaissance formula you had a white ground—in other words, color obtains in
a non-colored matrix—and coloring only began after the underpainting, here you have an
indefinite color; you get the feeling that all the colors together in their dark nature. This fully
illustrates what Goethe says—“every color is dark,” “every color is obscure”: the matrix of color
is this kind of dark bath which will make up the painting’s “ground.”

What is that supposed to mean? And why? You see, all of our concepts come back into play with
this dark ground, with this obscure matrix. There’s a good chance that it—what?—ensures the
primacy of the background. This time, the ground is responsible for securing the background’s

                                                                                                 11

primacy—what does securing the background mean? Everything springs from the background.
You can already guess that it’s no longer about glazing colors on a white ground… It’ll come
down to having every color, every gleam, all the brightness—that is, all the light—emerge from
the dark ground, from this “dark matrix.”

And the dark ground will be even darker for the shadows; it will make the colors pop out, and
naturally, the painter’s primary task comes to be that of blending, blending. He’ll blend the
bright colors, the colors into the shadows—it’s a whole other regime of color—and this will be
one of the poles of the birth of luminism. These bright lights that burst out from a dark ground—
a famous example: Caravaggio’s The Calling of St. Matthew.17

A student: Didn’t Leonardo da Vinci do that? Didn’t he blend?

Deleuze: Why yes, he blends, obviously, since he places his shadows and blends them. I’m not
saying he invented blending—blending now turns into something fully a part of the second task,
since inevitably—the ground will thus be colored in an indefinite way, it’ll be the dark ground;
the lights and the shadows will be organized in such a way that they emerge from the dark
ground instead of being “placed on” it.

So, yes, Caravaggio’s The Calling of St. Matthew is a famous example revealing this, a depiction
of St. Matthew in a dive, a seedy dive, in pitch-black shadow, a ray of light from a narrow
window on Christ. Christ’s hand points at Saint Matthew like: you… you…! As in, you, follow
me! And his hand is catching the light, right; it’s a great herald for Luminism.

Yet, in terms of technique, if we look at where these dark grounds -- which Caravaggio perfected
-- come from, it seems that Tintoretto, it seems you’ll find them already in Tintoretto’s paintings,
in some of Tintoretto’s paintings. Well, here we have a regime of color. Just like I was saying
earlier about the so-called “pale” regime, with a white ground and washed underpainting. Here,
however, it’s a dark ground and impasto color. This time it’s [the regime of] the saturated-dark
and of the washed-dark. In other words, it’s already a mixed regime, one that’s at once a regime
of deep hues and of muted hues.

And while there, too, all the hues are “produced,” and if I I’m looking for an equivalent, I’d say
roughly that this time the matrix [is] the mixture of three colors that don’t complement each
other—the indefinite color is this mixture: this dark mixture of colors taken in their dark nature,
in their obscure nature—that is, the three primary colors that don’t counterbalance each other. In
other words, it’d be a regime of additive mixing.

But in the other direction—so that Luminism is doubled—in the other direction, what do you
have? You have the legacy of the Renaissance that presses on, and precisely in doing so, its
meaning will completely change, that is: one picks back up, starting from Titian, this thickening
of the paste and this thickening of the paste will give the 17th century -- I’m specifying that
Caravaggio had a fundamental influence on the entire 17th century: it spread everywhere. It went
to Spain: [Jusepe de] Ribera and El Greco. It was all over France. He also had influence on the
Flemish—so Caravaggio was kind of a turning point. -- So, the other path, the extension of
Titian, recall that this white ground became thicker and thicker so much so that it no longer

                                                                                                      12

supported a underpainting but was the object of impasto work and took on color. Well, that’ll be
very important because that will be the birth of “glaze,” properly speaking; going back in time,
starting from painting’s origins, the ground becomes more and more starkly colored, while the
painting is done more and more impasto… It’s Rubens who goes all the way -- so that you’ll
tend to identify a glaze, strictly speaking -- to wit, colors are applied to a light ground, on a light,
colored ground. In other words, glaze, in the strict sense, is [putting] “color on top of bright
colors,” on top of colors that are sharp and above all “sharp and translucid colors,” and if
necessary, “brilliant colors applied to a bright ground.” Why not apply bright colors: precisely
because bright colors are too opaque. It’s the colors that will make “the ground” and one glazes
because one applies color to this bright ground.

Yet if that’s Rubens’s formula—for example, colors like ultramarine or pitch will be applied to
the bright ground. I believe one of the first to have proceeded like this in Titian’s line—but who
represents a deviation from Titian, a precipitation—is a Spaniard, so Spain would have these two
painters who… Ribera descending from the Caravaggio formula, and [Francisco] Herrera… who
literally paints on pink grounds, often not always, on silver pink, sort of silvery pink grounds…
this is glazing, properly speaking.

As a result, I think the strict definition of glazing is exactly the one provided by Goethe, only it
rightly excludes—it’s not glazing if I put colors on a white ground in the Renaissance way,
strictly speaking. The definition Goethe provides for glazing—he distinguishes three grounds. In
his Theory of Colors, in a quick overview, he says well, okay, there is the white ground in
chalk—he doesn’t mention plaster, but in fact it was mostly plaster—there is the white ground of
the Renaissance, the dark reddish-brown ground of Caravaggio, whom he does mention—he
cites very few painters, he cites Caravaggio—and he says: one must also add glazing to the list.
He defines glazing as what happens when one treats an already-applied color like a bright
ground. So, despite how the word is used, I’d rather not apply the word “glaze” to when color is
applied on a ground which isn’t itself already a color, a necessarily light color. It’s only glazing
when you place colors in thin, transparent layers on a light ground… Yet what does that give
you? This… [Interruption of the recording] [1:08:14]

Part 2 [Start of the second transcript at Paris 8]*

… his other formula. What other formula? The Caravaggio formula is once again dark,
saturated, or washed-out. Dark, both saturated and washed-out—saturated at times, saturated in
one sense and washed-out in another sense. So, it’s a regime I’d call—following our
terminology—a deep and muted regime, as opposed to the Renaissance’s pale regime.

Rubens’s regime, where you put down color on a light, colored ground, is the other side of
Luminism. This time it’s not that the light is drawn out of a dark ground or searches for a dark
ground; the light is in the background and it’s… it’s great stuff. There’s no backlighting, nor
Caravaggio’s style of light. There isn’t a ground; the light is always localized and either it’s
drawn out of the dark ground, or it digs up the dark ground as in The Calling of Saint Matthew.
Only an indeterminate light that bathes the background, with the foreground dark instead: that’s
the real form of glazing. But it goes without saying that, for example, in Vermeer you see it
constantly—very often, at least: the light background and the shadow of the back… of the

                                                                                                     13

foreground. It’s an extraordinary formula, but it’s also there -- I don’t have time to get into it
but… -- it’s also there in a painter who is nevertheless very, very different—it’s also there in
Rubens. Here, I’d ask, what regime would that be? It’s a bright, light regime… No, sorry, it’s a
saturated, light regime. It’s a saturated, light regime—that is, a bright regime.

But all I want to cover here before we take a break, you see there are regimes of color that
depend on, that come back to the space we examined before, and in particular, I’m coming back
to two spaces we examined before: the tactile-optical space of the Renaissance, modulated by the
line, by the collective line. And that provides, or that entails, or that corresponds to a pale regime
of color. But the color presupposes this space and this modulation.

In the 17th century, optical space, modulating light or modulated by light. Here again, you have a
regime of color, but there are several regimes of color: either the Caravaggio-type of regime or
the Rubens-type of regime. As different as they are, they both fall under luminism. They’re
luminist regimes; they’re regimes made up of color, serving an optical space and the modulation
of light.

What do we mean when we say that the true advent of colorism occurs, in western painting, in
the 19th century? In my opinion, it’s very simple. It’s not that the other centuries lacked… all the
problems with color were… they had them.

Why was the problem with color posed in a new way in the 19th century? Because the regime
changed? Yes. The regime of color is changing. Absolutely, as a function of the criteria we’ve
seen, related to the preceding criteria. And at the same time, it’s not just that the regime of color
changes. It’s that painters of the time probably needed something their predecessors didn’t. In
other words, colors are not only a regime that one invents or reinvents, which in itself already
implies a supreme colorism. But furthermore, it is color which determines a new type of space,
no longer tactile-optical space, nor the optical space of light, but a space truly proper to color.
And a modulation proper to color.

So, I’ll stress that all these accounts of color—complementary colors, diametric oppositions
between complementary colors—you get the feeling that, you think, “well what exactly does it
mean?” That was so important in the 19th century, [but] not anymore today—much less so, at
least. In the 19th century, the law of simultaneous contrast, that is, the complementary and
diametrically opposite relationships between complementary colors is color’s highest premise.

Again, my sense is that this isn’t a problem for painters today. It ultimately culminates, if you
will, with Seurat. Okay, I don’t mean that Seurat has been overcome; I mean that even when
painters take something or borrow something from Seurat, they totally ignore what’s really at
stake in Seurat: contrast, complementary contrast. I am saying, today that’s no longer the
problem, it’s no longer a problem, but it’s, you know, an activity…

It’s the same thing in philosophy, it’s the same thing in music, etc., and you can’t say that works
responding to a given problem are in any way overcome, but it explains why we see them in a
new light. There is a sort of decentering that takes place, something that was essential for the
artist responsible for a painting stopped being essential for us from a practical point of view. As a

                                                                                               14

result, our evaluation of the painting will emphasize things that were left unspoken by… There’s
a whole history inside the painting, you know?

But today, right, contrasts are very interesting, but anyway, painters really no longer resemble…
go through that, for a very simple reason: they discovered things so much more… more complex
in terms of color that, naturally, they weren’t content with the… this higher law.

And before that? Now, the relationship between complementary colors, you know, we shouldn’t
exaggerate— we knew about them: following up on a comment just now, it’s already there in Da
Vinci; already in the Renaissance. They knew all about it. They knew how to use it in practice; in
a way, they knew it optically, they knew it practically. Alright. In the 17th century, in the 17th
century you’ll find any combination—in Rembrandt—you’ll find any combination of
complementary colors you can imagine. When Rembrandt uses dark grounds, which you’ll often
find in Rembrandt, where light is drawn out, you might have a red foreground, a bright red
foreground, and there’s a muted resonance with the background, in a green or greenish dark
ground. It’s extremely clever, this resonance between the bright red and the greenish ground.
Okay. I’m thinking of a specific painting, “Le Bain de Suzanne”.18 Alright. They know all about
it.

So, what makes us say, Aha! It kicks off in the 19th century! It’s because they only sort of knew
about it in the 17th century; they didn’t really use it. I mean they knew about it in a “It goes
without saying” kind of way. It goes without saying since the relations between complementary
colors can be deployed – understand what I’m trying to say -- complements, contrasts,
oppositions between complementary colors can only be deployed in the 17th century based on a
totally other sort of ground or ground treatment. À la Caravaggio, for example.

On the other hand, these same problems with complementary colors become essential once the
ground’s treatment brings them to the fore. So, it’s only with the 19th century that something
makes this problem—despite being secondary for 17th century luminism—will become a central
concern for a period known as colorism in the 19th century, and for Impressionism in particular.
That has its day. Today the problem of color—colorists don’t take that route anymore.

So, what happens in the 19th century? What happens in the 19th century—you might already
guess—it’s what cast Xavier de Langlais into bottomless despair—it only gets worse and worse;
that’s why he says: they didn’t know how to paint. Or rather, it’s more complicated than that;
they very well knew how to paint. He says they’re great painters. Yeah, great painters, but they
didn’t know—as they say—how to prepare. They forgot how to prepare.

So, we have all the reactionary themes, speed… to hell with speed! At the end of the day, see,
they wanted to work quickly—it’s not as true for the… but anyway. They go more quickly; they
don’t prepare. They know how to paint; they don’t know how to prepare. What does “preparing”
mean? Well, it’s the fundamental act of painting since it’s all about the support. They stop
preparing. Then there are actually some who don’t prepare at all. For example…

Claire Parnet: [Inaudible question, about the egg]

                                                                                                     15

Deleuze: Yes, egg was the binding medium, but it was tied to the underpainting. If egg went
away, it’s only because underpainting concerns became obsolete with impasto work… Yeah?

Claire Parnet: [Inaudible question]

Deleuze: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yes, technologically, we’d have to bring up…there’s also the advent
of tubed paint, which changes everything. Well see, one couldn’t, for example, it wasn’t possible
to paint outside before tubed paint. But tubed paint is very recent: the 19th century.

So, how did they do things before? With Rubens, it’s very straightforward. He prepared his
paints. There were jars of prepared paint. There were jars of paint. He made his jars, three for
each hue: a bright hue… No, a color, a shade, and a tone. He had his three little jars. And for
gradients he painted onto the shadows, into the shadows. And then he had paste color on his
palette, which he used, in a pinch, to make accents. Well, I’m really moving forward: making
accents. See, the process had a sort of sequence to it: preparing the ground, thick in the case of…
preparing a thick ground; working impasto on already-placed colors, potted paints with
gradations, with a distribution of shadow and light, etc.; and then, thirdly, crucially, dabs of paint
on the palette for making accents.

So, if I were to describe the, the 19th century in very broad strokes, the techniques of the 19th
century—but here I’m really going too fast -- I’d say that the ground becomes less and less
important. The work of support, in fact, what does happen with it? You even have painters who,
then, work directly on the canvas. Paint on paint [couleur sur couleur]. I find that great because
that’s… it’s the formula—the formula for real glazing. Paint on paint. The base is treated by
color paint.

There are some Signac works, for example, he’s not the greatest, but some of Signac’s paintings
are intriguing precisely because there isn’t any ground. Or in Manet, for example, there is the use
of raw, so-called unworked plaster. Which in fact is rather odd since, at that point, such plaster is
very absorbent.

In other words, it’s almost the same—in my quick overview—as having a colored ground.
They’ll work… I mean, the advent of colorism in the 19th century, it seems to me, comes down
to people, to painters, who work with paint on paint. They no longer go through a white medium,
nor with… an external white medium, nor through an internal color medium, a dark medium.

Now, that’s great; it means that color begins to exist for itself. It comes to exist for itself on one
condition: that painters are capable of constituting a coloristic space and a modulation proper to
color. You get what I mean? A modulation proper to color, a coloristic space—what does that
mean? It means that it’ll no longer be mediated by light; light will be derived from color. The
line will be derived from color, etc.

So now that we’ve stepped back, we can devise a series of stages going back further and further.
You had three easy periods in the Renaissance: white ground, underpainting, a pseudo-glaze of
color. In the 17th century you had—and it had already culminated with Titian—a thicker and
therefore increasingly colored ground. Working impasto gets around the need for underpainting.

                                                                                                     16

And lastly, the triumph of color with Titian’s accents. In the 17th century, you have a kind of
time contraction, and things are rushed.

In the 19th century, if I were to sum up the problem of colorism in the 19th century, right, color
is in the accents, there’s nothing left but accents. A whole world is made up of what would, for
others, be final accents. Hence what I said last time: Delacroix’s cross-hatching, where Delacroix
still uses a Caravaggio ground. Only everything condenses, right onto the ground; he’ll make
cross-hatches that draw color out of the ground. And then the Impressionist comma-stroke, the
Impressionist accent, where it’s a bit like we say in music: ah, well, it’s the accents that count.
They discover that with color it’s the accents that count. Henceforth, it’s no surprise that it’s the
comma-stroke, that the unit becomes—this space’s unit becomes—either Delacroix’s crosshatching, or the Impressionist comma, or Seurat’s dot-stroke.

So Langlais has a legitimate concern, but still, we have to recognize who—he says there’s only
one guy who makes it out—that is, whose work doesn’t crack: Seurat. In other words, his
treatment of the ground, his use of it, his dot-stroke, etc., prevents it from cracking; it holds up.
See, there’s always an expectation that things last. As Cézanne puts it: “I wanted to make of
Impressionism something [solid and] enduring,” the sense that a form of painting does or does
not last.19 Very important for a painter. It’s a sort of question of time—we’ll see, if we have time,
why time comes up here. Painting that takes up time. If it does crack -- Langlais isn’t totally off -
- if it cracks after 20 years, it’s annoying in any case. We still don’t know how well the colors
will hold… “petroleum” paints, acrylics, etc. We don’t know. We’ll have to wait, but it’s already
inscribed in the painting, although we can’t say in advance. It’s inscribed in the painting: does it
last, the weight, the time, etc. Paintings have a way of being at the time, of being in time, of
having weight, etc. But Cézanne’s idea of making Impressionism something durable and solid
came down to problems with technique.

Claire Parnet: [Inaudible question, regarding a bleached canvas]

Deleuze: It’s possible… There is a lovely novel by Balzac on that.20 Yes, yes, it’s very
possible… Like any problem of restoration… So, it’s amazing; Langlais says there are only—
there are only a few beautiful works by Delacroix: it’s the ones that were restored by someone
other than Delacroix. Then it isn’t bad, he says, since it was done by people who knew what they
were doing. Alright.

See, what I want cover before our break, it’s that… there’s yet another regime of color in the
19th century. In fact, it’s one that I’d also call bright. But how is it different from the bright
regime of the 17th century? It’s completely different because the 17th century’s bright regime,
right, involved precisely a glaze on a light ground, while now they proceed with a painting of
accents. Accents have completely… Here, there really—there isn’t glazing any more, there’s
isn’t any more… it’s no longer… there isn’t any ground. The ground tends to disappear or be
neutralized, etc., and achieves color for itself, which from there will deploy for themselves the
relationships proper to color—first and foremost, the principal relationship, the princely
relationship between complementary colors.

                                                                                                     17

Hence the possibility of a modulation of color, and a modulation particular to color, even though,
before, regimes of color were the most brilliant in the world, were just as brilliant—but they
were dedicated, again, to other sorts of spaces and ultimately dedicated to colorless spaces,
whether tactile-optical space or the optical space of light and therefore dedicated to a modulation
that was defined otherwise, whether the modulation of the collective line or the modulation of
light. While here, we reach the opening of a space through color and of color, a space proper to
color, a space united by accents.

In the end, I’d say that it’s no longer the underpainting nor even working impasto. A painting of
accents is something different still. And so we are faced with this issue of the regime of color
that, finally, for the first time in… well, I’m exaggerating… in western history, develops a space
that can only be exclusively defined in terms of color, and a modulation that can only be defined
in terms of color. So, there’s very little left for us to cover, very little—it’s seeing what this space
and this modulation consists in. Let’s take a break… [Interruption of the recording] [1:30:49]

Part 3 [our division]

[Noises of chairs and chatter]

There’s not much to cover, then. I’ll just lay out some guidelines. That’s all. At the very least,
it’d be even better to discuss, if you want, that’d be good, too. That’s it… alright, some ways
forward… right, yes?

Georges Comtesse: About the question of the white or blackish ground… The Renaissance and
the 17th century, for example… The problem is the shift that results specifically from this
problem of the ground and of colors, of light and colors; the shift we find in contemporary
American painting, in particular in the painter Sam Francis. It’s very interesting to see just where
this shift is located because it’s precisely in him [that] there is a white ground, and the colors of
the rays, a bit like Delacroix, rays that cross the white ground like that. And the particularity,
contrary to Goethe for example in his Treatise on Colors, where ultimately black and white are
like the matrices of the color triangle, only that connotes—black and white basically stand for
light and shadow. It’s… whereas in Sam Francis there is another shift, inasmuch as white is in no
way shadow or light. White is, he says, “the color of every color, the primitive color” and he
calls it “the dazzling color,” the dazzling-distracting color and it’s the very dazzling that… where
the painter paints the birth of the painter’s gaze onto the canvas.21 It’s complicated.

That is to say, as opposed to white as a dazzling-distracting color, light becomes black. Or else
shadow passes into light, or light returns to the shadow, either way. At any rate, it spills over
binaries, and it shatters the color triangle. The color white as simultaneously white and black.
And then, regarding color, the sorts of chromatic bands that he spreads across the canvas, it’s
totally fascinating. It’s not a color somehow placed onto a white ground, nor even one lifted off a
white ground; it’s that colors emerge from the dazzling-distracting-whiteness. They emerge
while seeming to disappear at the same time in the white. It’s a sort of simultaneity, neither
presence nor absence—it’s the simultaneity of the emergence and the disappearance regarding
the event, the dazzling event that can at the same time be that of a black hole for the painter.

                                                                                                     18

Thus, there is a rather extraordinary variation regarding the ideal cut you’ve traced in the history
of painting or the history of regimes of color.

Deleuze: Very well put. Very well put. What we especially need to avoid, in effect, is believing
that it’s a revival of Renaissance spaces, even a modern revival. Because it’s in response to
colorist demands that all this modern colorism, with the role of white—it’s not only Sam Francis,
of course—it’s because of that… Oh well, good, that’s all I meant. But then I’m going very fast,
to give you some guidelines and to wrap up.

I’d say, based on… If you understand the requirements of this new—both regime of color,
another bright regime, and this regime’s new requirements, i.e., the deployment of a
corresponding space and modulation. I’ll outline… I’ll outline a first stage—I’m dividing it into
stages like this in order to give you some points of reference. In Impressionism then, by
definition you get a painting of accents. The reality of the situation, what turns out to be
fundamental, is the relationship between colors, which determines a new space. What makes that
so fundamental? Again, relationships between colors existed well before that. They weren’t
displayed in a purified form. I just mean they weren’t able to appear in a purified form on
account of the ground’s long history over the Renaissance and the 17th century. Whereas they
now have free reign. You might say that what softens color, or what builds color, is another
color. It’s no longer mediated by a matrix or by a ground—however you define matrix and
ground. In the Renaissance no less than in the 17th century, there is this mediation by the matrix
or the ground. Not here. No, there is no longer any need even if the ground remains; the ground
no longer serves that purpose. It’s the colors that regulate each other and that are deployed for
themselves, constituting a space.

So, my first cue is thus… it has to begin with a method of painting bit-by-bit. It seems necessary
that it begin with painting bit-by-bit, like the Impressionists, since again, the small pictorial unit,
the comma- or the dot-stroke, is specifically what replaces underpainting and impasto work.
Really, it’s the punctual constitution of space. Punctual not because it’s made point-by-point but
rather because the space is thereby understood as a network, a sort of point relation. Points are
fundamentally linked. Only, with this first stage I want to point out—that of Impressionism—it’s
sort of a problem of practical privilege, since the relationships between colors, now in the
foreground, have been doubled. Theoretically, you can always say that [the colors] are arranged
well; practically, if you are a painter, you need to privilege one or the other. You necessarily
privilege one or the other.

Remember, you can conceptualize the fundamental color-color relationships -- unfortunately, my
circle’s been erased… You remember the color wheel; good thing I made it ahead of time, since
I wouldn’t have time to do it… You remember the color wheel?22 -- Well, the color-color
relationships can be put either in terms of diametric opposition—the relationship between
complements: for example, red/green, which defines a diameter of the circle. So, color
relationships in the form of diametric oppositions are the relationships between complements:
simultaneous contrast. Or it might be a peripheral relationship produced by chords, from one
color to another, skipping an intermediary color—or even if it doesn’t skip. So, there are
peripheral relations transitioning between colors and diametrically opposite relations. But see,
the impressionists, whether with they’re using commas or dots, are forced to… at any rate, they

                                                                                                     19

use both. It’s for that reason that every impressionist text refers to both laws anytime color is
discussed: the law of contrasts and the law of analogs. The law of contrasts designates the
diametric opposition between complementary colors; the law of analogs designates the chords or
the peripheral course around the color wheel.

Thus: law of contrast and law of analogy. For example, in Cézanne you find it constantly, but it’s
in all the impressionists. You constantly see this reference to both sacred laws. Why can’t they
do one without the other? Well, they can’t deny, for example, that complementary colors… Even
if you proceed along the edge, you’ll reach complementary colors by going around the wheel.
And complements are singular points on the circle’s periphery that you’ll cross along the way.
So, running along the periphery will pass through and will involve complementary colors,
contrasting colors.

But conversely, there’s a contrast between two complements. All that contrast implies that you
don’t juxtapose them. In what sense? If you overlap two complements, you wind up with gray.
Opposition implies that both complements—for example, your red and green, so long as we take
them in large, pictorial terms, as surfaces—are very distinct, otherwise they couldn’t be opposed.
They aren’t juxtaposed since one has trouble shading from one to the other, into the other. When
you proceed like they do with Impressionism, and you saw why they worked like that, with little
bits of color. When it’s little bits of color and no longer in sections. For example, if you work
with dots or commas, at most you could juxtapose, almost juxtapose, two spots—a red one with
a green one. You can’t juxtapose two dots since the juxtaposition of little bits—I won’t get into
it, we all know—it’s precisely the definition of optical mixture as opposed to chemical mixture.
That is, it’s the eye that blends them. If you juxtapose little red dots with little green dots, the eye
automatically performs an optical mixture; it makes gray.

So, it’s necessary that, if you make a little red dot and a little green dot, there has to be enough
space between them for you to blend from red into green and for the blend, or the gradient, from
green into red. And this blending can be done in light/dark but it can obviously be done in color.
There is a tonal gradient in the color spectrum no less than from light to dark.

Therefore, if you privileged contrasts, or diametric opposition, you’re nevertheless bound to run
into peripheral transitions in color. If you privileged peripheral transition, you’re nevertheless
necessarily bound to hit major contrasts, the diametric oppositions. You might say: so what?
That’s well and good; we’re reiterating… That’s the definition of colorist space. Yes and no. In
practice, you have a very curious decision to make. You have painters for whom, truly,
everything is organized around diametric oppositions with the impressionists. And even in neoimpressionism, Seurat never stops telling us: what counts in the end are complementary
relationships. It’s the relationship between complements, and peripheral transitions are only
relevant for blending from one complement to the other. And that, indeed, is the method of
pointillism. It’s over, I think. But—but—but there are others who greatly prefer analogy,
working along the periphery, that is, they prefer the relationships between neighboring colors on
the color wheel, neighbors at variable distances, depending on the chords you choose and that,
that’s very interesting. So, you have to wonder with either one.

                                                                                                     20

Well, here’s an outlier: Pissarro. Pissarro really is a painter. I’m not at all saying that there aren’t
any contrasts in his work, or that there aren’t any complements in his work; I just mean he isn’t
interested in that. What interests him is building a world out of gradients of color. In other words,
what interests him isn’t opposition, it’s transition. These aren’t oppositions between tones;
they’re transitions from one tone to the next, with gradations in half-tones, quarter-tones, etc.

And it’s odd, because you may wind up with ambiguities, in impasses that are breathtaking
because they are creative. Pissarro, the most benevolent painter—he’s old, he’s taught so much
to other painters, he occupies a rather respected position in the group. Ah, old Pissarro, etc. The
dignified, perfect, amazing Pissarro. At the same time, he really admires what… I mean it’s so
rare in human nature for old guys to look up to what the youth are doing, we have to commend
him. It’s beautiful, to have kept…

Pissarro is amazed, Seurat, he finds Seurat—who to him is a very young man—he thinks what
Seurat’s doing is marvelous. And so, he’s digging Seurat’s dot-strokes. And at the same time,
he’s uneasy. This old painter, as talented as he is, says: well, yeah, he’s right, he saw something
and he saw the necessary link between the little bit, the point, the limit, the small bit and the
world of color that we’re all searching for. Seurat found it, he says. Okay, well, and he’s into
using dot-strokes since it has to do with capturing this space of color. But he never felt
comfortable with it, and you have Pissarro’s famous pointillist works. He isn’t comfortable with
it. That’s what we mean by saying, yeah, he’s using a method, but he isn’t the one who created
it; it doesn’t work. Something gets in the way.

But it seems to me that the hang-up is straightforward. It’s straightforward. It’s that the method
of using dot-strokes was an excellent method for building a space of color that emphasizes
opposition, diametric opposition. What interests Pissarro23 is the other aspect of the color wheel,
the peripheral line between neighboring colors. There’s no reason to use dots. The dot-stroke
loses its necessity; the dot-stroke is sort of gratuitous. Just like the painters who made the dotstroke gloomy, the un-vivid dot-stroke, the un-colored dot-stroke: there is Henri Martin. At a
time when everyone was coming down on and jeering at Seurat and his bright dot-strokes, there
was one jackass who adopted his method, who used dot-strokes—but dots… little non-colored
dots, little uncolored dots. Irrelevant. Everyone thought it was terrific—well, I’m exaggerating…
Henry [sic] Martin sold a lot of paintings; Seurat didn’t. It didn’t work for Seurat.

So, it was really confusing. Here you had work completely devoid of method. Mindlessly
making dots. He made dots [and] everyone said: What pretty dots! [And in Seurat’s case:] Ah,
no, that doesn’t fly. It doesn’t work. Pissarro wasn’t even at the same level; he adopted the
method through a sort of love for Seurat. He said to himself, there’s something here I can make
use of. No, the method didn’t really suit him because, again, his problem was the transition from
one tone to the next.

And I’d almost say the same thing about… Then, with Cézanne, it turns into something
inextricable. Cézanne made this whole colorist space, well beyond—I don’t know—he brought it
to a kind of absolute perfection… Last time I pointed out the coexistence in his work of the
luminist method, specifically, tackling the same subject using the luminist light/dark approach,
local colors, etc., blending the local color in shades, light/deep, etc. Anyway! And then the other

                                                                                                      21

method that he’s really the first one to pull off, the first one to even systematize—although it
varies with each painting; he isn’t using a formula—and that specifically involves: toss out any
problems concerning light, from the get-go. Don’t let any light show, don’t show any lines;
instead, make relief-effects with color. And the relief-in-color will be, will take, establish, a
sequence—only he never uses the same sequence twice, obviously—a sequence of colors, stepby-step in the order of the spectrum. A sequence around a culminating point.

So, you see that here, too, both aspects are combined. Because the culminating point will be
complementary with another point, located elsewhere in the painting, but all of the volume, all of
the color-volume, will be rendered by this sequence of small blotches—since he doesn’t use
points but fairly small blotches—a sequence of blotches moving along the order of the spectrum.

So, depending on the paintings of… I referenced this article by an Englishman,24 a very detailed
article on Cézanne, where he analyzes a dozen different sequences, alongside reproductions of
the paintings. Unfortunately, they’re in black-and-white… But that doesn’t matter. Anyway!

I’d almost say that Cézanne in a way seems closer to Pissarro than to… than [there are]
differences. It’s Cézanne who cries out: what matters is the transition between tones! Yet what
prevents him from—you see where the technique is headed, it develops into an extraordinary
technique—when filling in part of a sequence, he’ll forbid himself from using any mixture. He
has to find the right hue every time. The blending must be one made of color—Not… not one
from… light to dark. Every time, he has to find the right tone in the sequence. Otherwise, he
leaves it blank. The renowned [Ambroise] Vollard, upon seeing a blank spot, noted, “But that’s
strange; this spot is blank.” And he responded: “Please try to understand—if I use a blend or
roughly guess at the color, it’s ruined. I’ll have to start over. I’d have to start over, starting with
that color that I applied to quickly.”25

It’s like he’s searching for transitions. And when Cézanne frothed against Gauguin it’s because,
he says, “Gauguin took everything from me; he took everything, but he understood nothing.”
That was completely unfair, since I think Gauguin didn’t take all that much, and he understood it
perfectly well. He says: “Gauguin didn’t understand the main problem, the problem of
transitioning, transitioning between colors in the order of the spectrum.” Here he tells us his
method. See, I’d say that’s the first stage. This space of color, made up of pictorial units or little
pieces, stirs up a problem for the first time, namely, how to make two paths coexist in this this
space: the peripheral path and the diametric path. And in each painter, how does that take place,
how…? Alright! That would be the first stage.

What happens after that? If I make… Sorry, just some points of reference. But it was extremely
important… see, this business with Cézanne’s sequences, or this space made up of little bits—
this colorist space made up of little bits—it’s already a micro-space, pictorially, compared to
previous schools. It’s funny… it’s a funny thing, this colorist micro-space: it’s the triumph of
brightness. You can see how brightness is achieved via these sequences in a totally different way
from the bright regime of the 17th century. They’re two completely different regimes.

But then… But then… I’d say… If I were to circle back to what I said earlier. Remember that in
my comments about the diagram—hopefully you remember some of it—I said that what’s

                                                                                                  22

frustrating about the diagram is that it’s continually oscillating between two poles: between
code—and there might be codes grafted onto a diagram; in fact, it’s necessary for there to be
some—and interference, pure interference. We see it clearly in the history of color such as I’ve
tried to describe it. You’ll find the pole of interferences, for example, perfectly demonstrated in
Caravaggio’s dark grounds. When the ground… [Interruption of the recording] [1:55:03]

Part 4 [our division]

… in terms of the diagram regarding the other pole. It doesn’t take much for it to be a code. And
ultimately, ultimately, in light of some of Seurat’s remarks or even some of Seurat’s paintings,
you think: what is he introducing to painting? A veritable code, a pictorial code of dot-strokes.
With dot-strokes. It turns into a code. And in Cézanne, even in Cézanne, the sequences along the
order of the spectrum—it’s like the equivalent of a color code, a code particular to color, with its
two main laws, its two main formulas: diametric opposition and the gradual transition between
hues. Alright, then.

What happens after that? After that, what I’m getting at, it’s that this coloristic space—it’s
wonderful. Nothing else to say—it’s, it’s perfect. A thing disappears, I believe, when it produces
work as intended, when it was meant to… when it’s saturated by its own product. Then it can
disappear and die; we move onto another problem. Another way of addressing problems of
space. But there were two problems with these small units, with the first stage of using small
units.

The first problem was: what to do? You had sequences from point to point, bit by bit—types of
sequences, alright. But wouldn’t that destroy the architecture, the architecture of the painting?
Little blotches, dots, etc.—how do you maintain structure? And really—how do you preserve the
structure perpendicular to the colored sequences? Or to the diametric oppositions? How do you
maintain structure? That’s the problem. It isn’t easy with Cézanne: there is a whole game of
diagonals in Cézanne where, in a way, the line is brought back in. A Cézanne line, and so on, in
order to preserve structure or to reintroduce structure into this colored field, into space-ascolored-field. [Lawrence] Gowing goes so far as to talk about a virtual architecture in Cézanne,
based on examples.26 Even if the lines aren’t traced, a sort of structure of planes perpendicular to
the colored sequences has to be maintained, or else the painting winds up—well—limp. Winds
up—I don’t know—it winds up… just boneless. But Cézanne pulls it off. But what? Now there’s
no longer any code. It’s no longer a code of color; it’s something else. So that’s the first problem:
how do you maintain structure?

The second problem: the small units also compromise something, namely, the specific form, the
singular form of the object, the singular form of the object in danger of shattering into the dust of
these little bits. For Cézanne too, it’s a real problem. He works out his whole theory of the
culminating point, precisely in order to preserve the sort of singular volume of the object.

Well? It seems, it seems, that we’ve come to those who’ll break with impressionism to establish
a kind of… of… to establish a sort of expressionism, in particular Van Gogh and Gauguin. This
is the turning point for them. It’s as if—there are a thousand other things to say, that’s why…
they’re only guidelines. My impression is that those are really their problems. Well, that’s great,

                                                                                                     23

Impressionism gave us everything, did it all. Cézanne is a great man. They don’t like Seurat.
Seurat—Van Gogh did, Van Gogh is kinder; he also likes Seurat. Even he thinks that Seurat’s
dots and his comma-strokes—that they can work. But Gauguin is a lot harsher. He made up a
funny song about Seurat, with the refrain: one dot, two dots, three dots. He didn’t make it, no,
one of his friends. I’d love to find someone who could put it to music, because it’s a charming
song—very, very cheerful. But anyway, he hated the stuff. And then cut to Cézanne saying,
Gauguin took everything from me, [but] he didn’t understand it at all.

What did Gauguin want? And what did Van Gogh also want, although maybe less… less… in a
less pointed way. I believe this is what they wanted: to protect two things—but it’ll require a new
space and a new use of color. Totally new. It’s what make them bolt from Impressionism.
Preserving the architecture, that is, reintroducing solid structures, on the one hand, and on the
other hand, reconstituting the singular volume of the thing in itself. And how will they do that?
While they do find an interesting and elegant solution, it will in effect spell the end of
Impressionism. Then Impressionism lives on with Signac’s or Seurat’s neo-impressionism, but
Van Gogh—already with Van Gogh, not to mention Gauguin—takes it in such a different
direction that it really isn’t Impressionism at all.

What is it then? What do they do? Well, I think they retrieve, right, they retrieve… restore
architecture—what do I mean? Restore structure, which is to say, they elevate color. It’s not
about going back to an Italian or Renaissance sort of architecture, what in the Renaissance was
called the painting’s composition—it’s not about that at all. Because at that point they couldn’t
go backwards. They had to come back and reinvent an architecture of color and through color.
How will they do that?

That’s the first direction: restoring architecture through color with color. They rediscover
something that then had already existed, but they rediscovered it in an absolutely new context:
finally, they’ll discover color-structure. They’ll discover color-structure, and in this regard
they’re surprisingly modern, that is, something like what Comtesse just said, citing the example
of Sam Francis, but there are many American painters who use a color-structure. This is kind of
a triumph, I think, for a modern form of painting, more modern than impressionism.

And what is it? In simplest terms, color-structure is the return to the field regime.27 It’s the field,
color laid flat, a monochromatic color laid flat onto the canvas. And that clearly has nothing to
do with a return to the Renaissance. It’s actually the use of color-structure, while in the
Renaissance structure is maintained by something else entirely; it’s maintained by an instance, a
type of collective line, so it’s completely different. And this restoration of the field’s going to be
incredible; it’ll lead to all sorts of things. But the field, the field, the monochromatic field—what
does that mean?

And this is about the same time, remember, that Van Gogh and Gauguin enter the fray. What
does that have to do with anything? You see what Cézanne means when he says, “But Gauguin
didn’t understand anything about transition.” Nothing at all. Or rather, you could just as well say,
it’s true that Gauguin didn’t understand anything about transition, but that’s not his problem—
you can’t expect people to do everything, right? On the flipside, Cézanne doesn’t understand

                                                                                                    24

anything about Gauguin’s problem. Gauguin’s problem is how to make a structure out of color.
The monochromatic field is the simplest form of structure; it’s a uniform structure.

“Then that’s no good,” you might say, “In what way is a field a structure?” Well, it works fine.
Because something starts to take shape, something we’re still dealing with, where American
painting delved down and conquered a formidable coloristic space: a kind of band-structure
relationship. What one might call band-structure or ribbon-structure. What does that mean? This
structure… Now we can see that color turns into structure. When you combine flat structure, the
field, with a band of ribbon, there’s something specifically colorist going on. For example, some
of Sam Francis’s work is like this. One of the greatest American painters in this vein is [Barnett]
Newman, who rightly, is rightly called an abstract expressionist.

What does that give us? I mean, you make a monochrome field and you’re going to introduce—
in cases of complex structures— you’re going to introduce divisions, sections. Sections?
Sections either of another color, for example a field of—it doesn’t matter—a red field and…
with a violet section, and you can have a field several sections. Or you just run a band of a
different color across your field: what happens? You get this whole interplay. It’s monochrome.
You can include light and dark shades in your field. There are some painters who did that, but
not for long. Since the point is that the field be monochrome and that the only intervening
differences be not in value—light/dark—but differences in saturation.

At what level do these differences in saturation operate? Of course, it depends on where in the
field, depending on whether it’s close to the ribbon or far from the ribbon. You’ll have relations
of proximity between the field and the ribbon that crosses it. The field and the ribbon that crosses
it or bisects it—there’s any figure you can think of: a section, a rectangular section in the field, a
ribbon cutting across it all the way from top to bottom or from right to left, from left to right, etc.
All sorts of figures. And depending on the field’s color and its relationship to the ribbon’s color,
what’s going to happen, what kind of saturation?

Once you’ve understood these ribbon-structure or field-ribbon sorts of complex structures, you’ll
come back to pure monochrome, that is, to a pure field. And at that point you’ll see that it
obviously makes a structure. That the differences in saturation can themselves introduce a whole
framework, a whole structure, that is, they can function like sections, only non-localized
sections, or like non-localized ribbons. So that’s a first detail.

Here you have a deployment of color-structure. Then you might ask: what does that change? See,
at this stage, this is what I was talking about earlier: they couldn’t care less about complementary
relationships. That’s over. Why is that? You’ve come back to painting in broad strokes—and it’s
true that currently there’s a very important trend to return to the large, to large-scale. Well, you
come back to that: are you going to say that what motivates your sections of the field are
complementary relationships, diametric oppositions? No, that’s over! It’s not over, it’s not
over—I don’t mean that it’s over. I mean, well, it was really… That well has run dry; it’s…
know what I mean? I’ll reiterate that if you think about it, I think it’s the same thing in
philosophy, it’s the same thing for… it’s the same thing everywhere. There are some things that
are, well… they haven’t lost any of their timeliness so long as we don’t repeat them; if we repeat
them, it’s…. beating a dead horse, it’s a waste of time. That well’s run dry. We have to look

                                                                                                   25

elsewhere, we have to look elsewhere, if only to, and depending on… After all, if Cézanne did
what he did, it was so no one would be able to repeat Cézanne. And it’s the same with literature,
it’s the same with philosophy, it’s the same thing everywhere. Okay, good! It’s not the
complementary relationships, it’s differences in saturation between hues. What does I mean?

At this point I’ll only briefly refer to a great text, which came after Goethe, by Schopenhauer.28
Schopenhauer had revised Goethe’s theory in an early essay. And his revision was really
interesting because he introduced the idea of a space proper to color and a weight proper to color.
It was really strange, because he said that there’s no reason for the color wheel to be divided in
equal parts.

With devilish cunning, he proposed the following division: it was generally accepted that the
wheel was abstractly divided, abstractly, into three parts—the three-part color wheel. In effect
there are three complements. There are three complementary relationships: blue/red—no…
Sorry: red/green, blue/orange, etc. You have three complementary relationships. You divide your
circle in three, in three equal parts. Then, if you follow me, every two colors, every
complementary pair, occupies one third of the circle, but within each third of the circle the
relationship between one complement and the other—the relationship between a color and its
complement—is not symmetrical. So, for example, blue and red would be two-to-two: here the
third of the circle would be divided in two, but the blue-to-orange relationship isn’t even.

In other words… And for example, I don’t remember the numbers, it’s like 2 thirds, 2 thirds and
1 third. You see? Thus, each group of complements has its own area of distribution. I think that’s
important because with that, we already have a sort of structuration proper to color. Color has a
sort of spatializing quantity that varies from color to color. He made a few remarks on weight
that I found innovative, especially in light of how interested Americans today, American
colorists, are in color having a kind of weight.

And a color theorist, a modern one named [Josef] Albers, has a very, very concrete takeaway
from all that, since he’s a practicing painter. It’s what he calls quantity studies, color’s
spatializing quantity or weighable quantity, the weight of color. And Albers ends this bit by
saying: “Such quantity studies have taught us to believe that, independent of harmony rules, any
color ‘goes’ or ‘works’ with any other color, presupposing that their quantities are
appropriate.”29 I believe that’s what modern painting is. If you… So long as you only use
diametric oppositions or gradations between colors, there were still laws.

And Impressionism knew how to discover these laws, develop these laws, demonstrate these
laws—impressionism got as much out of them as it could. But down, down below, there was
something still humming, still… I don’t know what—a lawless world. And the lawless world is
when you introduce new coefficients of color, spatial energy, for example, or weighable energy,
and then everything goes with everything if you put the right coefficients! I really like this line,
because it’s a real painter’s line: “independent of harmony rules, any color ‘goes’ or ‘works’
with any other color”—that’s colorism.

And there is a text by Van Gogh that I find astonishing. When Van Gogh experiments with
fields, it has—especially compared to Cézanne—that has a lot of practical consequences: a

                                                                                                 26

change in values. It’s when Gauguin and Van Gogh—I’m not saying they stuck with it—but it’s
a turning point where they say: ultimately, the only thing worth painting, what it’s really about,
is the portrait. They say we have to develop, we have to go back to portraits and make a modern
portrait. It’s an about-face from Cézanne, because the Cézannian hierarchy (he wasn’t shy about
it—it was very clear) was: landscapes and still lifes, while portraits only, right, for Cézanne? A
portrait? No, and it makes sense what with his method. It makes sense; it’s integral. No way
around it. There’s nothing wrong with portraits, so long as you treat them like still lifes or
landscapes. Which is why Cézanne’s portraits are so much like still-lifes. But now it’s the other
way around. A return to portraits.

What does that mean? It can be totally traced back to this history of the evolution of color. Of
course, there’s a return to portraiture because (now I’ve run out of time, so that’s perfect)
because it’s no longer the diametric oppositions that count, what do you get when you come to
color-structure? What is the color connected to? With fields; it’s bright hues, the bright regime.

What are they going to be connected to? No longer to complementary colors, no longer to
gradual transitions, but to a funny thing called “broken color.” And what are broken colors? A
broken color is… If two complementary colors combine, you end up with gray. A broken color is
when you combine complements, but one is dominant over the other. A broken blue—you’ll call
it a broken blue—a broken blue is a blue… a blue/orange mixture where blue dominates. You
break the color. However, the same color comes up twice: as a bright and as a broken color. It’s a
way of overcoming both diametric opposition and gradual transition. It’s very intriguing.

And that will be like a… the two elements of the grammar of color: bright and broken colors,
starting from Gauguin and Van Gogh. But why do I say that that implies the return or brings
about the return to portraits? Not out of necessity but out of convenience—it’s because broken
color does an excellent job of depicting skin. Bluish, reddish hues—they’re made with broken
colors. And Van Gogh always says that the modern portrait should be done in broken colors.

But now we arrive at… You’ll have the Gauguin formula, as well as the Van Gogh formula: the
great modern portrait on the field, the field done in a bright color—skin, figures done in broken
color. Once it represents someone, whether or not it’s a portrait is irrelevant. Because the same
bright/broken color interaction—and the extraordinary freedom that gives you, since once again,
in my opinion you’ve surpassed both the limitations of diametric opposition and the limitation of
gradual transition. They conquered a new space of color as spatializing energy that I spoke
about, and at the same time, weighable energy. I’d say almost the weight of the broken color and
the spatiality of the bright color.

So, you have this formula, portrait on the field, broken/bright color with, as Van Gogh says, the
repetition of the bright color through the broken color; that’s what is going to become the colorist
formula for Van Gogh and Gauguin. And then, you can leave out what you want, the figure, etc.
At the end of the day, we have two colors whose problems are no longer decided by
complementary relationships or what have you. This is what Gauguin means when he says he’s a
colorist, yes! – and there, he says this directly against Cézanne – to be a colorist, yes! But an
arbitrary colorist, what does that mean? It means to have conquered the space in which the
relations between colors are no longer limited by contrast or transition.30 So here, in fact, that

                                                                                                                         27

creates distances, really infinite spaces of color. So, based on this, you can suppress everything,
all figuration, all motifs, all you like. You are left with your two elements of modern color, in my
opinion, namely, color-structure and color weight, or what can be called color-force.31

Once again, if I adopt some truly formal terms, color-structure, culminating in the monochrome,
with the monochrome field, and the structure of the field-ribbon or field-section, and on the other
hand, broken color which precisely reaches its height with skin and flesh – but one can do
without flesh, so the interplay between color-force and color-structure is what at once defines
this colorist space and creates a new form of modulation. Cézanne thought that this approach
meant eliminating modulation. One finds a whole new modulation basically defined, but only
basically defined by repeating bright color via broken color. That’s what this kind of modulation
will be like. Notice in any case that there are quite a lot of these color modulations.

Well then, there you have it! Have a great break! [End of the session] [2:18:00]

Notes

  The translation option is for “regime of color” as it appears in Daniel W. Smith’s translation of Francis Bacon.
Logique de la sensation (The Logic of Sensation [New York and London: Continuum, 2002)] and also in order to
echo Deleuze and Guattari’s “regime of signs,” found elsewhere, notably in A Thousand Plateaus.
  This is “gesso”.
  The transcript has “echoes immédiates” in quotes to indicate Deleuze’s emphasis which we retain, although it is
unclear if Deleuze was indeed citing a specific term.
  This is “gesso sottile”.
  The terminology around color in both French and English can be ambiguous or inconsistent across different related
fields—e.g., in art, colorimetry, etc. For example, teinte may be translated as “shade” or “tint,” terms with opposite
meanings in English: an artist obtains different “shades” of red by adding black and different “tints” of red by
adding white. Based on the four-part model Deleuze is working with, it’s a safe bet that he means teinte according to
another of its possible translations: “hue”, the “pure” color of a pigment without any added white or black (i.e., not a
tint or shade of the color). According to this latter usage, teinte is opposed to ton (the modification of a hue, e.g., tint
or shade). Ton, in turn, has multiple translations. The practice here aims for consistency in translating ton, teinte, and
so on. The only exceptions are when a particular translation might mislead the reader; in such cases, the safe
recourse is to use “color”, when differences in value, etc., do not figure into Deleuze’s analysis.
   While “schema” is arguably less natural, it is best to avoid “diagram” due to the latter’s place in Deleuze’s work.
  This was a model specified by the Association Française de Normalisation (AFNOR)—the standards have since
changed. It’s been pointed out that some of these terms—rabattu and lavé, for example—do not square easily with
more conventional ways of talking about color. Here the choice is for “muted” and “washed-out,” respectively. See
Christian Molinier, “Les adjectifs de couleur en français. Eléments pour une classification,” in Revue Romane (36.2,
2001), pp. 193-206, specific reference, p. 204n8.
  It is unclear what colorimetric formula Deleuze is discussing here as it doesn’t quite line up with Grassman’s laws
in optics, nor with any other evident account of the dominant wavelength method of describing perceived colors.
However, taking Deleuze at his word, perhaps he is only describing a basic premise or principle of such analysis
rather than the analysis itself. Color science does assume that spectral colors have complex profiles, and the
dominant and complementary wavelengths of the hues reflected by any given object share a so-called “white point”
in common. Color science aside, the choice here is to preserve the formulas in the session as they appear,
reformatted in the notes to parse more easily as formulas, fTfd+fw.
  Probably: fl = fw + fld.
   fr + fg + fb or fr + fg + fb.
   Deleuze may have meant gesso in general, but he also may mean the practice of applying a second layer of slaked
plaster—gesso sottile—atop a first layer of “rough,” unslaked plaster—gesso grosso.
   Xavier de Langlais, La Technique de la peinture à l’huile (Paris : Flammarion, 1959).

                                                                                                                       28

   When Deleuze says en respectant les lignes de l’ébauche, it is possible that he is talking about “underdrawing”
rather than “underpainting.” Along the same lines, “sketch” is a viable candidate. Van Eyck did use both
underpaintings and underdrawings in his work. However, the translation remains “underpainting” as it is a frequent
translation for ébauche vis-à-vis painting.
   The typical translation for repentir in English is the Italian term, pentimento. One could make the case for
breaking the word down into inaccurate but perhaps informative segments: to “re-paint,” which gets across the
method of working with the oils, wet-on-wet, directly on the canvas. How this would lose the perspective of
pentimento as an actual technical term—for example, the “fifth leg” discussed below is a classic example of
pentimento, but is not as easily connected to “repainting.”
   The cinquième pâte (“fifth paste”) should no doubt be cinquième patte (“fifth leg”). It should be noted, however,
that a horse’s legs are not typically referred to as pattes. See, for example, the description of x-ray and microscopic
evidence of just such a pentimento present in Rembrandt’s Portrait of Frederik Rihel on Horseback, in David
Bomford, Ashok Roy, and Axel Rüger, “Works by Rembrandt,” in Rembrandt, eds. David Bomford, Jo Kirby,
Ashok Roy, Axel Rüger, and Raymond White (London: National Gallery Company, 2006), 184ff.
   One finds a good account of Caravaggio’s innovative use of ground and drawing in Phoebe Dent Weil’s
“Technical Art History and Archeometry II: Exploration of Caravaggio’s Painting Techniques,” in Revista
Brasileira de Arqueometria, Restauração e Conservação 1.3 (2015), 106-10, in particular, p. 107.
   See https://www.artbible.info/art/large/44.html (accessed July 16, 2022).
   “Susannah and the Elder”, 1647; see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Susanna_and_the_Elders_%28Rembrandt%29.
   See Cézanne’s Correspondance, ed. John Rewald (Paris: Grasset, 1978), and Deleuze, Francis Bacon. The Logic
of Sensation, p. 187 note 2.
   This is probably a reference to Balzac’s Le Chef d’oeuvre inconnu (The Unknown Masterpiece), 1831.
   While an exact source for this Sam Francis quote, especially for the claims that Comtesse suggests, is not easily
found, there is an interview where Francis claims that he uses “all kinds of ‘colors’ to make the ‘form’ white,” and
another where he claims that red “contains every other color,” and another where he calls blue “the most primitive
color.” For some of Francis’s comments on color, see Debra Burchett-Lere and Aneta Zebala, Sam Francis: The
Artist’s Materials (Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2019), pp. 64-65.
   See session 6 of this seminar in which Deleuze develops this chromatic circle at great length.
   Deleuze says “Seurat” by mistake, as noted by Lapoujade.
   Gowing, see note 25.
   Deleuze cites—roughly, since it’s likely from memory—a moment from Ambroise Vollard, Paul Cézanne (Paris:
Editions G. Crès, 1914), p. 129. While Cézanne was working on Vollard’s portrait, the latter comments on a few
blank spots in the painting. As it appears in Vollard’s original text: “Si ma séance […] est bonne, […] peut-être
demain trouverai-je le ton juste pour boucher ces blancs. Comprenez un peu, monsieur Vollard, si je mettais là
quelque chose au hasard, je serais force de reprendre tout mon tableau en partant de cet endroit!” Deleuze swaps out
quelque chose au hazard for mélange and improvises the rest of the quote.
   Lawrence Gowing, “Cézanne: The Logic of Organized Sensation”, in Conversations with Cézanne, ed. Michel
Doran, trans. Julie Lawrence Cochran (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), pp. 180-212. See also
Deleuze, Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, pp. 117-121.
   The translation choice her, for aplat, is “field,” in keeping with Daniel Smith’s translation of Logique de la
sensation. If not for Deleuze and Guattari’s extensive use of bloc, “block” might be recommended as a possible
translation for aplat—some English discussion of Van Gogh’s interest in Japanese prints, for example, refers to his
uninterrupted fields of color as “blocks,” so there is some precedence.
   This text was probably Schopenhauer’s 1816 On Vision and Colors, trans. E.F.J. Payne, ed. David E. Cartwright
(Berg; London: Bloomsbury, 1994).
   See Josef Albers, Interaction of Color (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1963), 44. Albers’s account of
Schopenhauer is found on pp. 43-44.
   In reality, this comment about the “arbitrary colorist” is a statement by Van Gogh, Correspondance, vol. III (165),
letter to Theo [letter 663, 18 August 1888]: “I’ll paint him, then, just as he is, as faithfully as I can — to begin with.
But the painting isn’t finished like that. To finish it, I’m now going to be an arbitrary colourist.” (Translation from
“The Van Gogh Letters”, the Van Gogh Museum, https://vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/let663/letter.html (accessed
25 March 2024). Letter cited in Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation (166, note 8 Univ. of Minnesota; 194, note 8
Continuum).
   On these distinctions regarding color, see the chapter 16, “Note on Color” in Francis Bacon. The Logic of
Sensation, notably pp. 149-150.