1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on the Apparatuses of Capture and War Machines, 1979-1980

Lecture 06, 22 January 1980

Transcribed by Annabelle Dufourcq; augmented transcription, Charles J. Stivale

Translation, Charles J. Stivale1

Part 1
… Out of pure, unorganized material… uh… and I really wanted you to organize something on
this theme of the lament and its role in both the arts and in history. So, is there no one who
could… who might… [present] in my place… Anyone? [Pause] You really aren’t very
cooperative. [Pause] Alright, so we’ll just drop that, huh. I was hoping ... [Pause]
On what we did in the last few sessions, are there any problems, are there any ...? No? My most
skillful appeals are still ... [Laughter] Fine. Well, that’s too bad, because I don’t have much to
say today, so ... Okay, well, let's go ... Does anyone want to talk? [Laughter] Ah la la ... Good.
Well. Aaahh.
What we saw in the last few sessions is ... – I’m not managing… I’m not managing to say it
concretely enough… -- it's a certain comparison, a certain description of types of assemblages.
And how is it within our subject, this comparison, this kind of descriptive study? It's really
description at the point we’ve reached, describing types of assemblages. And what I am taking
from our subject -- "what is the State apparatus?" that is, “what kind of assemblage does a State
mean? » -- what I am taking from this and what I insist on -- because it seems to me a little bit
[inaudible word] -- is that we have managed to distinguish these two assemblages -- they are not
the only ones; there is an endless list of assemblages -- but, uh, those two assemblages that we're
mainly concerned with at the moment, namely an assemblage consisting of a territory-code
combination and an assemblage consisting of quite a different combination, land-overcoding
(surcodage-terre). And we saw that land was always in… within a certain gap with the territory,
just as overcoding was a completely different operation from that of codes. And it’s on this that I
would like to ... uh ... I don't know, I would like to back up a little bit, because it seems to me
very, it seems to me ... at the same time, I’m not managing to express this concretely enough, and
I feel that there are all kinds of concrete applications.
I am saying: we spend our time in our lives, or long moments of our time, in the regime of the
territory-code assemblage, and either collectively or personally, we spend a lot of time coding
territories. And what mattered to me was that a certain number of notions were necessary to
define that assemblage. And as we saw, what are these notions? It was the idea that a territory
assemblage, a territory-code assemblage is defined by its exercise. It is an exercise assemblage,
that is, when one arrangement exercise is completed, we start over elsewhere by changing
territory. As a result, this is an itinerant assemblage; this is the assemblage of itinerance. In

                                                                                                        2

previous years, we have seen, we have tried to distinguish between nomadism and itinerance.
These are not the same at all. But itinerance is indeed the state of one who follows a territory
flow by passing from one territory to another according to codes. So, an exercise assemblage or
an exercise of assemblage … -- but an exercise of assemblage is only valid in this type of
assemblage: exercise assemblage -- well, an exercise of assemblage is defined precisely by: as
long as I stay within this territory. And then afterwards, I don't change the assemblage, I carry
my assemblage into another territory.
As a result, a second point [is], every assemblage of this territory-code type, with corresponding
assemblage itinerance, with the corresponding itinerance, will be defined by what was called a
limit. In a territory, the assemblage is truly serial, and the series is defined by a limit.2 This limit,
as we have seen, is the final object, the final object, what was called in marginalist terms, the
marginal object or the last receptive object. Receptive as a function of what? Well, as a function
of the assemblage. I mean, beyond this final object, there are, of course, other objects, only they
could not be captured, they could only be invested if we changed the nature of the assemblage.
So, in this territory assemblage, it is always stretched towards its limit, towards the evaluation of
the final object and, at the same time, it conjures the beyond, that is, something that would still
be after the object which could only be grasped in another assemblage.
So, I chose some stupid examples like the last drink, the final word, the last drink in the cafe, that
is, the marginal drink, the final word in a discussion, in an argument, in a domestic argument.
Uh… I think, to make this even clearer, if you will, I am selecting an example in which this
seems very, very obvious to me, the assemblages, for example, Proust’s assemblages in In
Search of Lost Time.
Proust has an idea, like that -- I am not saying that this has a universal value; it is valid for him,
really -- he has an idea; in the end, this is within the domain of love. Every love pursues in a
certain way its own end (fin), its own ... It repeats its own limit. Fine, that's an idea, it's
beautiful… uh… that's how it is, he lives like this. He explains very well that, for example, his
love for Albertine, from the start, does not cease repeating the end of this love. So, it's not a
repetition of the past; it's like a kind of pro-repetition. So, every love is oriented towards a series,
a series which is defined by a limit. This limit is the rupture, the end of this love. And this love,
at its most vibrant moment, well… in its own way repeats the approaching rupture. Fine. He's
sad, eh, he's sad, but finally Proust was difficult to live with. Fine. So, there we can see, I would
say: this is an assemblage exercise. Moreover, the same love can involve several exercises. For
example, in Proust’s case, there are two successive loves for Albertine, for the same person, eh?
Fine. You see what I would call an assemblage exercise. It implies a certain territory. It occurs in
certain places; Albertine is linked to places, all of that. And this series, the Albertine series or the
two Albertine series, are oriented towards the limit. [Pause]
So, it's each love that is serial and, once a love has reached its limit, well, the narrator of In
Search of Lost Time switches to another love, for example, from the first love for Albertine to the
second love for Albertine. You see? So, each time, the assemblage exercise is defined by a series
oriented towards a limit. And then, there is… -- but we must not say that it comes after: all this

                                                                                                      3

surprisingly coexists -- there is like another dimension, another dimension where Proust has
more or less the presentiment, and has the presentiment more or less vividly, that there is another
assemblage which is being constituted at the same time. And what is this other assemblage? This
is the assemblage of his work (oeuvre) to be completed. This time, it's more of a romantic
assemblage; it's, let's say, an artistic assemblage.3 Fine. He tells himself all the time: "oh yes, uh
... I'm wasting my time ..." -- Time lost is also time he wastes, right? -- “I am losing/wasting my
time with Albertine”. He says, "I should work, I should take up my work ...", all that, as if it were
another way of assemblage. Maybe the two aren't mutually exclusive, maybe they can coexist,
but that's another mode of assemblage.
And a very bizarre revelation will occur; he tells himself at one point, in his love for Albertine:
"Hey, I'm going to marry Albertine. Well yeah, I'm going to marry her,” he tells himself. He tells
himself: “No. I have my work to complete." It's not that these oppose each other; he could do his
work and marry Albertine, why not? No, it is…, but what interests him is that it is not at all the
same type of assemblage, that when he tells himself, and when he has the revelation, it is not
enough not to tell himself, he tells himself this all the time: "Ah my work, I am going to do my
work". Only, as he does not know how to do it or pretends not to know how, but, at the moment
when he has the revelation of what his work will be, and he tells himself: "There, I have it”, at
that moment, he switches to another assemblage. This is what we called the threshold and no
longer the limit. The limit is what separates one assemblage exercise from another assemblage
exercise, the assemblage remaining of the same type. The threshold is quite different: it is the
passage from one type of assemblage to another assemblage.
And, if I defined my serial or territorial assemblages previously itinerant assemblages, we saw
the last time that the other type of assemblage is only a relative dualism, it is only a relative
distinction. The other type of assemblage was, in fact, quite another thing. It was an assemblage
that was no longer defined by the itinerant relationship of a code and a territory such that a
territory is exhausted by a series oriented towards its limit. In that case, I am defining the
aggregate of the itinerant assemblage. But this is an entirely different kind of assemblage; this
time, it is an assemblage in which the coexistence of exploited territories, the simultaneity of
exploited territories, constitutes a land (terre), therefore is radically distinguished from the
territoriality of itinerance, [Pause] and where this aggregate ... -- it is no longer a matter of a
series, so it is a matter of an aggregate of territories exploited simultaneously; what I am saying
applies to agriculture, but would also apply to any other domain, the territory not being
fundamentally an agricultural territory; it can be, but it doesn't have to be -- this time around,
there is an aggregate of territories exploited simultaneously, and this is what defines a land.
And, at the same time, this aggregate consideration, this coexistence of territories, will no longer
refer to a code of itinerance, but to an overcoding of sedentarity. And it is there that we
discovered the assemblage that corresponds to the "State apparatus" as opposed to the
assemblage of itinerant groups. In other words, there it was no longer an assemblage of limits, it
was an assemblage of thresholds. And this assemblage of thresholds -- and I am saying: it
coexists with the other assemblages; it is not the same type -- I cannot say: we go from

                                                                                                         4

assemblages of itinerance to State assemblages, no. We have seen, in the social field, there is a
kind of play of coexistence of all these assemblages.
So, if I try to define it according to the results of the last time, this "State apparatus" assemblage
as we have it for the moment, let me be clear: it is indeed what we called, from the beginning,
"archaic Empires". These are archaic Empires and, I remind you, we have seen that the dates of
these archaic Empires, according to the results of archeology, must be pushed back more and
more. This is not even, as was believed, from the middle of the Neolithic; it is really at the very
beginning of the Neolithic and even must result from the Paleolithic, that is, uh…, if you will,
they are formed between 10,000 and 7,000 BCE. Finally, "they are formed" ... according to the
traces that we have.
How can I define them? Well, from our results the last time around, I think, you have to bring in,
to describe ... if I wanted to describe this "archaic Empire" assemblage, I would need two
dimensions. In one dimension, this assemblage has two aspects. It implies a comparative space,
on the one hand, and, on the other hand, it implies a point of appropriation which we called
monopolistic appropriation. And these two aspects, in all areas, manifest themselves: a relative
space of comparison and point of monopolistic appropriation. And we saw the last time that the
second aspect, the point of appropriation, was deeper, that is, in fact was determined. The space
of comparison assumes the point of appropriation.
And, as I did not indicate it in this form, I remind you, in fact, of the various aspects in which we
found this. We saw that these archaic Empires seemed to involve what, first of all? A comparison
of the territories exploited simultaneously, that’s the comparative space. Land arises and
develops, unfolds as a comparative space of territories. So, it is no longer the successive
territories of itinerance where, once one territory gets exhausted, I move on to another territory;
here, there is a comparison of territories which will be constitutive of the land. We have seen for
the so-called differential rent (rente) that the differential rent was precisely this ancient
mechanism resulting from the comparison of simultaneous territories.
But we have seen that this comparative space, namely this comparison of the simultaneous
territories which constitute land, assumed a point of monopolistic appropriation, this time the
absolute ground rent (rente foncière), and which is or which defines the right of the despot
insofar as being the eminent owner of all the constituent territories of this land, the despot, the
eminent owner of the land of which the communes subordinate to the Empire are only
possessors. So, there you have both aspects perfectly: a space of comparison, a point of
appropriation.
In the second aspect which is no longer the land, which was labor, you have the comparison of
activities which implies a comparative space, the comparison of activities between them under
the regime of labor, and you have the point of monopolistic appropriation, namely: surplus labor
or the fact that the worker owes a duty (corvée) in the form of public works, owes the despot a
duty. And we have seen in what sense, here too, the point of appropriation was primary in
relation to the space of comparison, namely surplus labor was primary in relation to labor to the

                                                                                                      5

point that one can only speak of labor in regimes where there is a special category of surplus
labor, namely public works.
And then, at the level of a third dimension, at the level of money, we had encountered the same
result: a space of comparison in the form of market money, a point of monopolistic
appropriation, in the form of tax-money. Now, what mattered a lot to us, and what I really want
to insist on because, I don't know…, I don't know, that seems good for us, here too, it is the point
of appropriation which is primary, namely: the market use of money obviously implies the
issuance, creation of money, and the creation of money is strictly inseparable from the operation
of taxation. So, it is the tax which is, there, primary in relation to the commercial use of money;
it is taxation that creates money. And it is not by chance that the State apparatus thus defined,
from the archaic Empire, implies in its main determinations the issuance of money.
So you see that, if I need so many dimensions, it is because I would say that, vertically (en
hauteur), if you will, the two tiered determinations of the imperial apparatus is: the tracing or
development of a comparative space and a point of monopolistic appropriation. And as
horizontally (en largeur), this outline will unfold as three -- horizontally, I don't know ... yes -- in
three privileged segments, the land segment, the labor segment, the money (monnaie) segment,
and, in each of the segments, you will discover comparative space, point of appropriation, the
point of appropriation being decisive in relation to the comparative space, namely, in the land
segment, in the uh… labor segment, and in the… er… money segment.
As a result, for those who uh ... uh ... have been working here for ah ... for a longer time, we can
attach ... even if it means making ... [Deleuze shifts direction] What matters to me in such an
apparatus is that, obviously, you have these points of appropriation, these sectors, these three
great sectors, the apparatus of capture … I was saying: the imperial apparatus as apparatus of
capture obviously has three heads. It has three heads: land, labor, taxes. So, at the extreme, you
have three points of appropriation, appropriation of the land by the despot, by the great Emperor,
the appropriation of labor in the form of surplus labor, the appropriation of money in the form of
a tax. And it is appropriation that is creative. Okay… oh! But, I would also say: it is not three
points of appropriation, because the characteristic of this apparatus of capture is to create
resonance together, and the three heads of the apparatus of capture resonate and precisely
constitute the public figure of the despot, the despot as being at the same time the great
landowner, the eminent owner of the land, the eminent contractor of public works, and the great
imposing banker, that is, the creator of money.
So, I can say that in such a system, everything is public. This is what I wanted you to understand.
Everything is public by definition. There is absolutely no private sphere. As Marx says when he
describes this type of Empire, you basically have communes which are overcoded by Empire;
communes can have collective possession of territories. The despot is the eminent owner of the
land, but insofar as being a transcendent unit of the communes. The despot’s functionaries --
namely the soldiers, the bankers, euh… the scribes, the contractors, etc. -- can receive tenures,
delegations of property, but these would be functional tenures, that is, they are not private
owners at all, no one is a private owner. The whole system is a public system.

                                                                                                     6

This is what and this is how, at the beginning of this year, we were trying to define the notion of
machinic enslavement. Like [Lewis] Mumford says, like Mumford says, it's a mega-machine,
which is a huge machine. It’s the first mega-machine.4 This is the first mega-machine; everything
is public in the system, and see that you can really define it as a mega-machine, an enslavement
machine in the sense that it is an apparatus of capture with three heads, the three resonating
heads. And, at no moment can I assign a sphere that surpasses the public. This is a public
apparatus.
Yes, I am adding, in order to create the link, therefore, with the research that we had undertaken
over an entirely different year, you recall that, in this, with two years distance, I don’t remember,
maybe more, perhaps more, it interests me that we are discovering something which, from a
completely different point of view, gives us confirmation if necessary. I recall, for those who
were not there at all, that over one year, we dealt with a notion which was that of face.5 We
asked ourselves: what precisely is a face? And we told ourselves: well, there you go, a face is not
a personal thing. In fact, there are societies which include faces, and there are societies which do
not include faces. A face is a system of, uh… collective functions, of social functions.
But maybe there are very different types of faces. In particular, maybe, for example, the famous
stories…, the… the so-called primitives and their reactions when presented with photos, maybe
that doesn't mean much, because: what are they reacting to? Are they reacting ... uh ... are they
reacting to the magic of the photographic apparatus or indeed are they reacting to something
quite different? Namely, there is still something quite insane about this abstraction of the face in
our societies. It's very weird ... Maybe so-called primitives, maybe they don't have a face, that is,
it's something else, something functions ... these are groups without faces; maybe they have a
head, eh? A head is not the same thing as a face… uh… not at all. I don't mean that they only
have bodies, but maybe the face is some kind of crazy abstraction. In what case and how did this
sort of transformation from head into face come about? And what is the use of our face socially?
Well, it's obvious that… uh… it's obvious that it's very difficult even to talk about the role of
language in societies if we do… if we don't take into account the fact that all language is indexed
on a face . All the stories about the signifier, we don’t see very well… we really don't see what
these can mean if they are not indexed on the face. Hey, ... uh ... how ... language is not the
abstraction that some linguists maintain. "Hey, he doesn't seem in a good mood today"; "Oh, he
doesn't look like he’s in good shape," uh ... When I entered this room with the demented wish
that you were going to present something, eh, I told myself: "hey, are they going to talk?", I am
saying ... well, then ... uh ... You, you react: "he is going to give us a hard time again", all that,
fine. All that is very indexed onto faces, but what is this kind of… literally, this kind of erection
of the face in some societies and not in all of them?
Fine. Why am I bringing this up again? It’s because, at that time, we had tried…, since, assuming
that the face is not at all a personal thing, that it is really a function of certain groups, which
therefore fulfills certain social functions, we wondered which machine it depended on. And we
told ourselves: to create faces, it’s not so complicated, right? To create faces, the first way to
create faces is what? And we had looked into this, and we had arrived at a kind of very abstract

                                                                                                     7

machine of the face, and this abstract machine of the face was exactly ... we told ourselves: well
yes, that does not provide a concrete face, but if I try to identify a kind of abstract diagram of the
face, it is ... I’m satisfied with two elements: black hole, white wall. A black hole is displaced
onto a white wall. So, that doesn't resemble faces, but rather, this is the abstract diagram of the
face.
Since then, I had not yet consulted these documents, I don't know if ... Since then, in any case,
this has been very ... I am thinking of a book that recently appeared, a wonderful gift book
because it is full of beautiful, beautiful reproductions. This is a book by a guy who has become
and has developed into and now has really become a specialist in a tiny little area, namely
protective scrolls in Ethiopia. This is a very special thing, the protective scrolls in Ethiopia. The
protective scrolls in Ethiopia are things on… parchments; it's a kind of popular magic, very, very
popular, right, among poor farmers, but at the same time has… some very literate predecessors.
This is a very curious thing. I refer you to the book called, yes, Protective Scrolls in Ethiopia or
Magic Scrolls, I don't know ... in Ethiopia, published by Le Seuil, the author being Jacques
Mercier,6 and, therefore, on parchment there are drawings. Obviously, the Byzantine influence is
very great; if you remember the Byzantine faces, you see, that is what was called the frontal face.
What is the frontal face? Well, before anything, it's: one black eye, two, okay, by repetition, but
not just two, it can be four, it can ... On the protective scrolls, they put eyes everywhere, and this
is what will determine…. This is the essential act. And Jacques Mercier confirms this, right?
What will determine the whole rhythm, it is not at all the decorative patterns that will unite the
eyes, it is this swarming of black holes. Two, four, infinite ...
And you have the surface of the parchment, the distribution of black holes and, from there, the
constitution of faces with, as they say, "ember eye" (oeil de braise). If you remember the last
Negus, the last Negus obviously had a court of magicians, and this court of magicians made him
extremely formidable. And, if you remember the eyes of the last Negus [inaudible word], as they
say, ember eyes, except that the embers are not black, but sometimes ... it can be red eyes. And
these eyes are precisely the eyes of the Ethiopian tradition of Solomon, namely the eyes of the
angel or the devil. And here, we can see this system of the imperial face very clearly. The
Byzantine face is still a great stylization of the imperial face; it is the face seen frontally, namely
"a black hole which moves on a kind of white surface". Why am I recalling this? Because I am
saying: this is in fact the public face; everything is public in the archaic Empire. Everything is
public without merit, because there is no such thing as a sphere of “private life” yet. Everything
is public. And, the formula or the illustration, the illustration of this apparatus of capture is
exactly that: the point of monopolistic appropriation that is displaced within a comparative space.
So there, for my pleasure -- that's why I was going back over all this -- for my pleasure, euh ...
from a completely different horizon, it seems to me that we find a confirmation, there, of what
we had studied regarding quite another matter, concerning the face, that the imperial apparatus of
capture, with its two components -- point of monopolistic appropriation, space of comparison,
such that the point of appropriation is displaced within the space comparison – is graphically
expressed ... no, not graphically, is expressed plastically in the form of the despotic face seen
frontally, namely the black hole of appropriation as you still find it in the Byzantine face, in the

                                                                                                            8

Ethiopian face, in all kinds of faces marked by an imperial tradition. And it is the "black holespace of comparison" that will constitute the public face of the despot. You understand? [Pause]
So, what seems very important to me, once again, is to see the sense in which, at the same time,
the apparatus of capture, this imperial apparatus of capture, might have assigned to it particular
aspects or others, but in some ways, all of these aspects resonate together. What I am stressing is
that our analyses during the last session showed us how, in each aspect, you had these two
dimensions, these two fundamental dimensions, the point… the point of appropriation, the
comparative space in which the point is displaced -- once we’ve said that it is the point of
appropriation which is displaced within the comparative space -- it is this point of appropriation
which is constitutive of the comparative space. It constitutes it by tracing it and displacing itself.
And, we have seen it for the land rent, we have seen it for public works, we have seen it for
money-tax. As a result, once again, tax is the monopolistic appropriation of currency which will
become marketable within the corresponding comparative space, but it is at the level of tax that
the money is created.
So… uh… everything is fine, ok. So, what I would like... you understand, if you find it useful ...
for one another, all that, but I ... euh ... in this ... within this precise outline, well, I will not go
any further, because that I do not see ... But, if, in your own work, ... euh ... in fact, whether this
might be research ... euh ... in the last session, I appealed to you to think about the subject of the
lament, but, it would be necessary here to link, in fact, these productions, for example: the
technical production of the face, the archaic Empire as being the producer of a ... of a type of
face, the despotic face which, once again, is the face seen frontally with its two… with its two
black holes, at least, and its… its kind of space of comparison. And then… uh… or else that
according to which you see as well at the level of land and land rent, or at the level of tax and
merchandise, if indeed one can say this for other eras, if we can say this ... euh ...
I raised the question, here, can ... can we say this as well for the Empires of the East as for the
Greek Cities ... -- for the Greek cities, it seems very true, indeed for everyone Aegean, that
money has an origin in tax and not in… and not in the trade -- Is this also true, then, of the
Eastern Empires? For me, I believe this is true, once again, for a very simple reason which is
that, in all archaic Empires, trade is above all over-coded, that is, it is the Emperor who has the
exclusivity over trade, at least for foreign trade. Henceforth, the way in which, for example, I am
thinking of the compartmentalization of trade in the Chinese Empire, of the entire effort of the
Chinese Empire to overcode trade, to prevent it from having its autonomy, it really is, it’s an
object…, in relation to the Emperor, it’s an object of a monopolistic appropriation. Henceforth,
even for the East, it seems to me that the market value of money is subordinated to the issuance
of money, which occurs only on the basis of taxes. There is no control of trade without taxes.
So, we would have to look in entirely different directions. So, we have Eric Alliez [with us] who
is working on something… euh… very interesting and that I do not at all know, which is
mercantilism, which therefore refers to entirely different regimes, but in the case of
mercantilism… euh… what relations might we find between… mercantilism… this is at the
same time an economic theory and a practice, especially a practice which was very important in

                                                                                                      9

Europe and which gives a certain relation, which establishes a certain trade-tax relationship.
What type of relationship? And would that confirm our analysis there? Don't you want to talk on
this, don't you want to?
Eric Alliez: [Inaudible answer]
Deleuze: But in its inspiration? No? No, no, as you wish, eh, as you wish. I mean, if ... because
it's very complicated, you understand ... For at the same time, trade is divided precisely in its
comparative space into internal trade and foreign trade, but also taxation is divided into direct tax
and indirect tax. The two dualities obviously do not correspond at all. Indirect tax seems very
interesting to me, indirect tax, because it would allow something perhaps to be seized that direct
tax is hiding. Direct tax is not constitutive, any more than rent. Direct tax is a bit of the rent type;
I mean it doesn’t enter into determining the price of a commodity. But indirect tax enters into
determining the price. So, I am not saying at all that indirect tax maintains the secret, but indirect
tax allows us to understand much better in what sense tax is a condition presupposed by trade. It
is at the level of indirect tax that, here, in our modern societies, one could discover a link
according to which one could confirm that the commercial relationship presupposes taxation.
[Pause] Yeah ... [to Alliez] Yeah, you'd rather ... uh ... talk about it some other time.
Eric Alliez: [Inaudible remarks]
Deleuze: Okay, you see? You see?
George Comtesse: [inaudible] a question?
Deleuze: Yes!
Comtesse: [Inaudible words] these three heads of the Empire, the Emperor as owner of the land,
the entrepreneur, the banker [inaudible words]… Would [inaudible words] push this limit back,
the face as limit, the face, which would reject the analysis of the machinic assemblage [inaudible
words] desire of the Emperor. [inaudible words] That is, what is -- the question I'm asking
myself is this: what is the despot's assemblage of desire so that he might become owner,
entrepreneur, banker?
Deleuze: I understand your question, yes ...
Comtesse: [inaudible words] We could ask the same question again after Marx: the analysis he
makes of Capital, in the three books of Capital, what is ultimately the desire for, not that Capital
induces, but what is the desire from which Capital itself is deduced?
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes. There, I say…, I say it really sincerely, because I am not at all sure that I
am entirely right, and I am not at all sure that you are, so... But the fact is that we always collide,
you and me, upon the same difference, that is, if we translate that into ... as a reproach, not… for
more convenience, the constant reproach that you make to me is not going far enough. You say
to me: "there is still something else, after what you are saying, which must account for desire".
And I -- so I really don’t say that I am correct -- it's like a sort of irreducible difference between
us, because every time that… you intervene, I have that same feeling. And I myself will reproach
you, conversely, for always reintroducing a kind of transcendence, by demanding something

                                                                                                   10

other, yet again, which would take account. Because, for me, if you will, once I've described an
assemblage -- and if you grant me that an assemblage description is not ... is a particular type of
description -- but once I have described an assemblage, describing the assemblage means
showing exactly what kind of, literally -- this word has been used on other occasions -- what kind
of abstract machine the assemblage realizes. Suppose I say: the face assemblage, well yes, it
realizes the following abstract machine: black hole-white wall, point of appropriation-space of
comparison. Once I've said that, I don't feel the need to say anything anymore, because it seems
to me that desire is never, in any way whatsoever, behind the assemblage. Desire, for me, is
solely and exclusively what puts the different parts of the assemblage into communication; that
is, it is what makes it pass into the assemblage, or it’s the co-functioning of the ... [End of tape]
[46: 43]

Part 2
... abstract machine, but the assemblage as the realization of a machine is desire, right? To say
that one would still need something else which takes account, for example, of the despot’s desire
once that, or of capital’s desire, once one has described the Capital assemblage or the archaic
Empire assemblage, for me, literally… euh…, I mean uh…, if you will, me… uh… me no. I am
no longer following any of this, because it seems to me to reintroduce a kind of transcendence.
Comtesse: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: I understand that we do not understand each other.
Comtesse: [Inaudible words] We can't just say "desire is what causes to circulate [Inaudible
words]
Deleuze: You see. Yes we can; I am not mistaken, Comtesse. You are indeed telling me…
Comtesse: [Inaudible words] that desire is reduced to making the assemblage function, for
example, imperial or capitalist, which is not the same thing anyway.
Deleuze: For me, yes, it is. For me, yes, it is. Desire means: it works.
Comtesse: Do you think that the imperial assemblage is the same thing as the capitalist
assemblage?
Deleuze: Why are you making me say that, since this is not at all the… well, it's not the same
desire. No, our difference is not there.
Comtesse: Okay, so ... only ... only, in the imperial assemblage and in the capitalist assemblage,
we can ... we can speak perhaps -- this is a strong hypothesis -- we can perhaps speak of an
assemblage of desire which would not at all be transcendent to the imperial assemblage or to the
capitalist assemblage, but which would analyze a very functioning of this assemblage and which,
however, would allow one to speak of an assemblage of desire as assemblage, as what precisely
assembles Empire or Capital. So, it's not at all about the ... about the ... let's say the detour of a

                                                                                                     11

transcendence that I am asking this question or making this interrogation, because transcendence,
I don't give shit about it.
Deleuze: Hey! Don't get rude! [Laughter] No, you understand, I am telling myself: so, you are
asking for something more. Once again, I come back to my reaction; you have to manage to
develop it because, when you demand, and as long as it remains in the state of this proposition,
"something more is needed", I am telling myself: this “something more” -- I am telling myself
that, by a nervous reaction -- I am telling myself: this “something more”, either it's going to be a
simple abstract transfer of the assemblage, like a simple ... a simple repetition, or else it will be
something which goes beyond the assemblage and which, literally, is transcendent. You are
telling me: no, that's not it at all. So there, I am saying: it would be necessary… you would have
to develop it within a specific case… euh…. Am I betraying your very statements by saying that
you claim a dimension of desire which, one way or another, differs from the assemblage itself?
That's not it, eh? … you see.
Comtesse: [Inaudible words] to analyze it starting from the functioning of the assemblage ...
Deleuze: But how does it differ from it?
Comtesse: The question is very simple: what is the assemblage of the despot's desire so that,
precisely, the despot is this owner of the land, this contractor for major works, and this banker,
precisely, who… with the tax [inaudible words]…
Deleuze: Do you mean that these determinations of desire exist before the assemblage?
Comtesse: No.
Claire Parnet: No, of course not.
Comtesse: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: So, it’s that ... it roughly responds to what we call "abstract machine". In fact, the
assemblages realize abstract machines. But I don't see how this is an assemblage of desire; I
mean, you say constantly: assemblage of desire that you distinguish therefore ...
Comtesse: … of this assemblage of desire, you, you offer an element of the assemblage, that is,
you offer the "face" element, it is not certain ... it is not certain that the element or the face
component which is effectively a component of the assemblage of desire immanent to the
imperial arrangement would be the entire assemblage of desire. That’s the question.
Deleuze: Ah yeah, there, no…, the face is an element, in fact. I offered other elements: the earth,
etc. ... Your objection, it seems to me, has a completely different meaning; it does not consist in
telling me: you are reducing everything to the face element because that would be false, since I
introduced the money element, the earth element, the element etc. ... My question is exactly this:
here, here is an expression which is sometimes used by economists, so there, we would take a
current, classic expression: desire for money. For me, "desire for money" is an expression that
only means one thing, namely: define the assemblage in which a particular kind of money is
created having a particular function. If I manage to describe this arrangement, I have said what

                                                                                                     12

the corresponding desire for money is. It seems to me that you are telling me: no. No, you have
to define the desire for money in another way. I’ve got that right, haven’t I?
Comtesse: Not ... not necessarily [inaudible words] it is desire that makes ... the assemblage of
desire; this what we start from for there to be desire for money, that’s what the meaning is. That
is, desire for money is effectively the desire to create money [inaudible words], it is a desire ... it
is a despot’s desire, but it supposes the assemblage of despot’s desire. [Inaudible words] For
example, I am taking… I am taking… I am referring, for example, to make myself better
understood, to a book which is, which appeared a year or two ago, I believe, well, I don't quite
agree with this book, but it's one of the directions, one of the lines of… [inaudible words]. It’s
Alain Grosrichard's book called The Fiction of Asian Despotism.7 So, this book presents itself as
a book of sometimes fictional analysis, but it has the interest and the merit, even if it remains in
an interpretation at the end of the book [inaudible words], even if it remains within an
interpretation in terms of the phallic signifier, therefore a Lacanian interpretation, nonetheless it
has the merit of posing the problem of an assemblage of the despot's desire that would not be
reduced quite simply, that we could not reduce everything simply to the exercise of the despot’s
power, that is...
Deleuze: Mmmh, the question is a bit elevated, Comtesse. Are you distinguishing…? [Deleuze
does not finish the question] Listening you, I have the impression all the time that you want to
distinguish between despot’s assemblage of desire and despotic assemblage.
Comtesse: Yes, because you are talking about the power of the despot, the despot as owner, as
banker, that is power, eh? Power refers to surplus labor… or else to the work of others [inaudible
words], but that is not enough. We cannot simply analyze the assemblage of Empire as the
assemblage of power. There is perhaps a conjugation between an assemblage of desire and an
assemblage of power which would not be at all separable, not at all dissociable, but, precisely,
the difficulty of which would be to show how that works, it can work together.
Deleuze: Listen, power, there, we'd on about this, uh, I suppose, both of us, but you are making
me say, then, in your turn, things that I am not saying. I have never defined the assemblage as an
assemblage of power; I define it as an assemblage of desire. In the despot’s case, what does that
mean? That means: for the despot’s power to exist, what must have already been imposed? Land,
work, money, face etc., this is not a closed list. Okay, so here, we can ... But what interests me is
not that aspect at all; what interests me is that precisely land, money, face do not pre-exist. So,
there is a creation of the land in distinction from territories. There is a creation of work in
distinction from activity, from activities. There is a creation of money in distinction from trading
(échanges), marginalist trading. When I linked these determinations to their creation, on my own
account, I believe that I have taken the operation of desire into consideration. The phenomena of
power only flow from it and flow from it secondarily, in my opinion, it seems to me. So, I don't
define the assemblage at all as a structure or a device of power; I define it as an assemblage of
desire. And, once again, what matters to me in the history of land is that, as soon as the land is
established, it is a source of rent. That defines an interest as well as a power, interest and power
of the owner. Good. But, as soon as the land is constituted, it is a source of a rent, but it is not

                                                                                                       13

this interest that will make it possible; this interest assumes that there is land and, more simply,
the itinerance of territories.
So, my question specific to the assemblage of desire is: how is land constituted in distinction to
the territory? And there, that's neither the interest, nor an exercise of power that will account for
that. What will account for that is a passage from one type of assemblage to another; it is an
entire organization that takes off in relation to the territory, which implies a kind of lift off in
relation to the territory and that I have tried to define. So once there is land, yes, there is rent. But
if you will, for me, what one could almost call poetic acts of assemblage, namely real creations
are by nature always primary in relation to the practical determinations of assemblage of the
interest type and power type. So, that's why I have no need to seek a ... something extra,
whatever way that you understand 'extra'. [End of tape] [59: 18]

Part 3
Deleuze: ... Is that clear, at least? I think it's very clear. You wanted to say something.
Claire Parnet: Yes, that is to say ...
Another student [perhaps Hidenobu Suzuki]:8 I would like to talk about a Japanese writer who
precisely explained something about the origin of the State in Japan. But this is a book that
rejects all materialistic theories about the origin of the State, so it explains the common illusion
or common phantasm. The author used Japanese myths and tales as documents ...
Another student: [Inaudible, but given the answer, he seems to ask the name of the writer]
The first student [perhaps Suzuki]: … The author's name is [Takaaki] Yoshimoto -- so he was
using Japanese myths and ethnological tales. [Inaudible words] is that the origin of the state is
not located in materialistic conditions, but located in, how to say, in types of mental,
psychological illusions. And this author, Yoshimoto, is greatly influenced by Freud, but he
rejects Freud to the extent that he says there is the difference between the type of psychology
which is based on the sexual relation and collective psychology. There is the difference. So, we
cannot speak in the same way of the sphere of the collective and psychology based on the sexual
relation. So, in this sense he rejects Freud's theory. But in any case, he explains the origin of the
Japanese State as being based on the types, on the germinal forms of common illusion which
ultimately form the State as a mental object. So, what we talked about earlier, it seems to me to
correspond a little to what this author said, that is, explaining the origin of the State like the seeds
of mental illusion, and I would like to know whether Deleuze rejects this domain of the origin of
the State as something transcendent or not.
Deleuze: Well, I'm a little ... a little ... overwhelmed (abattu)…
The same student: Because when you mentioned the magical capture, it immediately reminded
me of [inaudible words] to the extent that you are talking about the magical aspect of capture
anyway.

                                                                                                   14

Deleuze: And yes, and yes, but this is very ambiguous ...
Claire Parnet: I would like to ask a question too.
Another student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: What? What are you saying?
The student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: The Japanese author is like Hume? Uh ... I don't know ... [Laughter] I don't know ... [To
Parnet] You wanted to say something, right?
Claire Parnet: I wanted to ask you, finally, when you say: this capture means that, for example,
when we are born, we are already caught, that is, we are already within it, is it that thing which
causes it to function, are you speaking of it in the same way as desire, well, that makes this
assemblage function? That is, because desire makes the assemblage function, is this when desire
makes this assemblage function that, precisely, when we are born, we are already caught?
Deleuze: Uh, both. This is indeed because desire is completely immanent in the assemblage, that
is, desire is not something which, which precedes…. There is no desire other than assembled or
assembling (agencé ou agençant), this is the same, saying that it is assembled or saying that it is
assembling, but there is never a desire for something which already would not be given. So that's
one thing. Uh… When I say, this apparatus of capture necessarily functions, necessarily it
functions, since we are already in it, what does that mean? It means exactly, once again: this is a
capture operating on certain kinds of aggregates. This is why I needed to define the
corresponding assemblage as an assemblage of aggregates and no longer as serial. This is a
capture operating on certain kinds of aggregates. And you cannot define these aggregates without
the apparatus of capture already intervening there, the apparatus that will operate on them. So,
this is obligatory. This simply means that, in the assemblage, it is indeed desire, which is the
circulation, that is the operation of circulation itself, without which there would be no
assemblage.
Parnet: Yes, but, since ... this particular assemblage, that is, the despotic one that you were
talking about, well ... uh ..., when you defined, when you spoke of land, you said that it was a
relationship between land and an over-encoding of land…
Deleuze: and a territory, yes, and an over-coding of territory.
Parnet: But, the overcoding, doesn't it… doesn't it also… In the end, for me, when Georges
[Comtesse] is talking, well, that's what I understand, but I don't know if he would agree, doesn't
this over-coding, doesn’t it… also intervene in the way in which desire allows parts of the
assemblage to come together. ...?
Deleuze: Of course it does, in this case. In the case of an assemblage of over-encoding, it does
intervene, of course. It is strictly everywhere in the assemblage. It is everywhere.

                                                                                                    15

What bothers me more is, of course, where there is a great ambiguity, it concerns what you just
said [the Japanese student], what bothers me greatly is that in all the outlines that I am
proposing, there is never any reference whatsoever to any sort of "illusion", euh ... or even
"mental reality", none at all. So, when I followed Dumézil in using the notion of magical capture,
that did not at all refer to a domain that would be one of beliefs or illusions. Not at all. "Magic"
was a convenient and temporary word to distinguish this type of capture from other types of
capture. We would say, for example: yes, there is a war capture, but it is not at all the same as a
State capture. And lo and behold, in mythologies -- but these I do not consider to be illusions
either – we hear about a certain type of knot, a link, which is called the magic link, but which
also has its name in archaic Roman law, as we have seen, the nexum, n-e-x-u-m, which
corresponds exactly to that, this sort of magic knot.9
So, for me, "magic" was the provisional word, since I could not yet, at that time, define the
nature of this link; it was only a provisional word to point out that, be careful, this was not a knot
operated through the violence of war, it was something else, it was another type of link. So,
subsequently, we progressed, but I would also say, at that time, if we want to talk about magic, I
would say that the currency, land rent, tax money and labor are magical determinations. At that
point, I would say, there is indeed an objective determination of "magic". The objective
determination of magic is when, in fact, you define an operation on an aggregate, but at the same
time, you cannot define the aggregate without having already placed the operation into it. There,
we locate a kind of knot which might be called “magic”, but in fact, it is perfectly objective in
such an assemblage. You will say to me: but this is contradictory, an aggregate such that one
cannot define it independently of the operation which bears on the aggregate. I would say: no,
this is not contradictory, since it’s not at all a question of a universal definition; it suffices to
define precisely the assemblage that makes this possible. Yeah ... well ... yes?
Another student: [Inaudible remarks]
Deleuze: Yes ...
The student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: Yes, here, not only are you not mistaken, but you are even right… uh… [Laughter] I
mean: it goes without saying that, from the perspective of the archaic Empire, the aggregate of
possible functions of the face is not all exhausted. Moreover, the corresponding art, this archaic
Empire and the art which corresponds to it only create or assemble -- it comes to the same thing -
- only assemble a certain type of face to the point that when you say: but, all the same, there are
other functions of the face, obviously yes, apart from this assemblage, there, that is, with this,
you are completely correct, and, in fact, it's not hard to ask the question, good. Even if what we
are saying is suitable for this frontal face with the black hole and the white wall, well, finally,
there are other types of face, and these other types of face, by what do they define themselves?
Well, already by a famous figure, a completely different figure of the face; it is from the moment
when faces, which then become several, several faces are placed into profile. Several faces in
profile, that absolutely does not correspond… [Deleuze does not finish]

                                                                                                    16

Uh, I insist on this; it is that a method like the one we are looking for, a method of analysis of
assemblages, immediately allows us to exclude ... If someone says to me: but what are you doing
with several faces in profile? Notice, all of a sudden, that interests me all the more since I tell
myself right away: faces in profile can be in a position of allegiance to one another. For example,
a seated king and then a knight coming in and then the king has the face at two thirds, the knight
has the face at ... a quarter, I don't know what, and one pledges allegiance to the other. I need
only describe such a piece of assemblage to know that it is not a despotic assemblage. This is not
a despotic assemblage. Why? Well, like that, because it suits me, okay. [Laughter] The despotic
face isn't… -- but you can tell the words are quite rich; we have already distinguished, for
example, we should not confuse the despot of the archaic Empire with the tyrant of the Greek
city; no relation. We will not confuse ... the tyrant of the Greek city with a current dictator, all
that is ..., it’s ... or we really mix everything up. -- What I defined as a despotic face, and, there,
you are completely right to say it: ok, this is absolutely a question of an example of assemblage,
a type of face, it is this frontal face and which has no interlocutor or which doesn’t have any…,
any…, respondent described, indicated. The Byzantine face sees you frontally; it is you, you are
the external spectator who is its respondent. What shows this? It is precisely that all the
Byzantine depth is between what you see and you who are seeing.
When, on the other hand, you find yourself facing an assemblage, the assemblage can be very
compelling, for example, well ... uh ... there is Christ and the apostles, there is a king and
subjects. I can say, it’s anything that you want, but it’s not a despotic assemblage. It can be a
monarchical assemblage, it can be an assemblage ... In any case, it belongs to a whole other
world. The proof is that, at that moment, the depth will be integrated into the relationship of one
face to the other. It will no longer be between the face seen frontally and you who are looking, as
in ... as in a Byzantine work; it will be completely integrated into the work. This won’t allow us
to say that this is progress; we will say that it is a whole different assemblage.
So, the interesting cases for ... as to the question you are asking is: Aren't there some
extraordinarily mixed cases, straddling over them? Obviously, there are. I mean, let's take the
long history, since, in this matter of the face, there, which I was summarizing, Christ had a
fundamental role from the pictorial point of view, from the plastic point of view. If you take…
er… the face of Christ, you have… -- first of all, it all depends on at what moment, but let's even
say the crucified Christ -- you have almost Byzantine Christs, that is, where, there Christ still
participates in an archaic imperial face. There is God the Father behind Christ. But Christ keeps
all kinds of elements of ..., all kinds of Byzantine elements. Then, there, Christ is like a spinning
platform; we also see that with Christ appears a completely different type of face, and all the
transitions from one to another, notably…, already, the face of Christ is a little turned away or
completely in… completely in profile, at the limit, and therefore, is put into relationship with
other faces, without this excluding, once again, the relations of allegiance, the relations of
command, but these are no longer despotic relationships, they can be relationships of another
nature.
Once again, the question is not whether it softens; it does not soften… uh…, but, it's a whole
different type of face. The year we were considering the face, I don't know which [students] were

                                                                                                    17

there, but, there, I am recalling it to jog our memory, we chose the example of a painting which
is very well commented by a critic. ... uh ... critic named Jean Paris, a painting by El Duccio uh
... which shows Christ and two apostles and which is precisely a hinge painting, a spinning
platform painting, because one of the apostles still has a face in the Byzantine tradition and it is
precisely the one who face frontally, while Christ and the other apostle are already in a
relationship with a face in profile, with a face turned away, turned back, turning towards the one,
and one towards the other, which precisely marks a completely different painting technique, that
is, which emphasizes that depth is no longer between what I see and myself who is seeing, but
that the depth is integrated into the pictorial elements of the painting. And there, it is in the same
painting that you have an element which gestures toward the Byzantine tradition and another
element which gestures toward the future of painting which is readying itself, namely the
integration of depth and new perspective.10 So, on that, absolutely, I completely agree with you.
Good. Well, then, therefore, let’s continue. What time is it?
A student: Ten to twelve.
Deleuze: Ten to twelve?... What? Yes?
Another student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: Yeah ... I regret to say again that, for me, this problem absolutely does not arise,
because you would have to know what "for him" means. Either you use "for him" in a sense… in
a very, very indeterminate sense, and, at that point, it's still too vague, or you really mean: "for
his own person". Now, the despot possesses no person. “Despot” designates only a public office.
So, to say: the despot would seek, for example, seek power for him? Uh ... It seems to me, at the
limit ... "for him" is an empty expression in such an assemblage. There is no "for him". The
question we are now colliding with is, in fact: when will a category of the "for oneself" (pour
soi) type arise? When does this category of “for oneself” arise, which obviously implies a private
sphere? As the despot is a public function, as he reigns over communities that only exist
collectively, there is absolutely no "for oneself", there is no private sphere; it is an arrangement
that excludes any private sphere.
So, I am saying: at this level, “despot” refers exclusively to… -- it seems to me that Marx and
even Engels say it very well in their text on the Asiatic Empire -- it is not at all a person who
takes power; it is rather more of the type, if I try to summarize everything: you cannot define, for
example, the land function in its difference from the territory function without, as a correlate of
the land, there being a despotic function. But this is not a person; it’s a function. So, he has no
"for himself" at all, any more than the civil servant has any "for himself". Hence, when I say:
everything is public, I mean: the municipalities own the land collectively, the land. The despot is
the eminent owner, but not "for himself", that is, it is his very function which defines the unity,
the transcendent unity of the territories simultaneously considered. Each territory is occupied, let
us say, by a municipality which has collective possession of it. The despot is absolutely no
different, is absolutely not a distinct person, with the following function: the unity of the
territories that constitute the land.

                                                                                                    18

He is not a person at all, he has no "for himself", so he does not seek a "for himself", nor power
"for himself". First of all, power, well -- I have never mentioned power in this, it's not at all, the
assemblages that I'm trying to describe, these are absolutely not power apparatuses. -- Power
flows from it. Power always flows from it, and it follows secondarily, but it is a particular kind
of power. Functionaries, for their part, as representatives of the despot either at the level of the
land, or at the level of money, or at the level of labor, entrepreneurs, bankers, owners, are not
owners for themselves; they are solely functional owners. It’s insofar as they are functionaries of
the despot that they have the benefit of a particular plot of land, or rather of the income from
such land worked by the communities, owned by the communities. So, it is like a kind of public
property with three floors: municipal possession of the territories, eminent property of the
despot, delegated property of the functionaries. But, at no time is there the least private landlord
about whom you could say: this is a "for himself".
A student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: Are functionaries the eyes of the despot? Yes, it is the multiplication of eyes, yes. As
in… as in the Ethiopian parchment, we start with two eyes, and then we… they swarm. So,
you’ve got things with four eyes… four eyes, eight eyes… “eight” eyes… uh… eight eyes
[Laughter], twelve eyes, etc. then they swarm everywhere.
Another student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: What?
The student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: The?
The student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: Yes.
The student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: Face-landscape, it is… it is… it is… yes, it is of the same type as…, it belongs to these
correlations, of these changes of assemblage, finally, of these…, no, of these ... Uh, if we admit
that, in fact, there may very well be a head and even a human head that is not constituted along
the mode of the face, in the same way, there are milieus ... there are milieus and even human
milieus which do not necessarily constitute landscapes. So, uh… it is perhaps in the same
assemblage that the heads are erected into faces and the milieus erected into landscapes, and, in
fact, it is obvious that the transformation of milieus into landscapes involves precisely what we
will call planning (aménagement), regional planning. In this sense, we could say that the first
transformation of milieus into landscapes is done with public works. There is no landscape if
there is no public works. It is public work that constitutes the milieus into landscapes.
So there, we can see very clearly that it can be in the same way that the body-head system is
transformed or produced from the face by entering into a new assemblage, and it is at the same
time that the milieus produce landscapes under the action of public works. If you will, I would

                                                                                                   19

say: ultimately, yes, uh… the birth of the landscape is something… it is, in fact, when we build
pyramids in the desert, [that’s] an entire development of the desert, there, which will transform
the desert from milieu into landscape. Currently, the transformation of milieus into landscapes,
well, this has been completed for a long time, but it continues, it continues, it is perpetually
recreating itself. You see? But I don't think you can define ..., in this sense, there is an obvious
correlation between face and landscape.11 It belongs to the same assemblage. … Yes?
Another student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: I can't hear you.
Student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: Ah, certainly not!
Student: [Inaudible words]
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes, but, uh ... you understand, then, take the example of Kafka. I am
saying that in an analysis based on assemblages, things are extremely, uh ... complicated,
because it is obvious that in concrete reality, everything is mixed up. You have assemblages
which are the concrete assemblages which are always mixed. Simply, they have dominant
aspects. In Kafka’s themes, for example, in Kafka’s themes, we can see very well where the
mixtures are. But, precisely, if Kafka is so modern, it is because he refers to other assemblages,
he refers to current assemblages, he does not refer to ... assemblages as archaic as those about
which we are speaking for the moment.
But still, if ... I am choosing an example, a uh, well-known example, it is The Great Wall of
China. The Great Wall of China typically describes the construction of the Great Wall of China
under the supposed conditions of an archaic Empire. However, his answer to a Kafkaesque
pattern that you find very often is the pattern of the pyramid, the pattern of the pyramid or the
tower. You remember, in The Great Wall of China, there is the construction of a tower in the
center, a tower that will never be completed, which is very, very weird. I would say: this pattern
of the tower or the pyramid surrounded by a wall, it is very precisely the archaic imperial model.
So, it intervenes within Kafka. But what Kafka doesn't stop… -- he doesn't say it, obviously,
because he has too much art, it's not his job to say it -- he does not cease showing that this model
functions so little that, on the one hand, if I take the… Kafka's texts literally, sometimes he tells
us: this model has… never has been completed and will always remain unfinished, because they
moved on to something else. To what? He will express it. Or he says: it's true, it exists, but only
if one only looks from a distance. It only exists if one only looks from a distance, because, as
soon as you get closer, you realize that it's a whole different assemblage.
So, Kafka's first theme: yes, it exists, but it was never completed; it was replaced by something
else; it is the Great Wall of China. Indeed, the nomads came, etc., etc. Where did they come
from? They are already there before we understood how ... The Emperor ... the Emperor of China
is no longer the despot since he is reduced to hiding behind his shutters and curtains, while in the
square, while in the town square, there are the nomads who camp out and their carnivorous

                                                                                                      20

horses which are eating the meat. It's beautiful. [Laughter] Good. There you go, this is a first
note on Kafka.
A second note on Kafka: This is only true from a distance, you can see that both, uh ... are ...
Why is it only true from a distance? There is the great example of the castle. From a distance, K
sees the castle, and the castle corresponds absolutely, from a distance, to the archaic imperial
model: a great tower… uh…, a kind of pyramid… uh… a celestial bureaucracy, the despot's
functionary, etc. But the closer K gets -- and in fact, he can't get any closer, so it gets even more
complicated than that -- the more he realizes that what he took from afar for a castle or for some
sort of bell tower or for a tower is in fact an aggregate of small huts connected to each other in
length. The text is magnificent, this sort of optical transformation of the castle into a sort of…, an
aggregate of shacks that are even more disturbing.
Okay, so let's not get into the "what does that mean?", but finally, for convenience, let's say:
what does that mean? It's that, understand, we are already in a whole different assemblage. Kafka
simply situated himself at the crossroads of the two. It is no longer the tower-pyramid
assemblage; it is the assemblage, this time, [of] corridors, endless corridors horizontally and no
longer a transcendent tower vertically. And when Kafka… -- but you know… uh… who, you
know, was a specialized bureaucrat, a great bureaucrat, right, that he occupied important
bureaucratic functions -- Kafka never stopped wondering, there, very… -- this is not symbolism,
he never created symbolism -- he reflected on the modern conditions of bureaucracy.
Uh… I'm not saying that his work holds… boils down to that, but it was one of… one of Kafka's
most pointed subjects of political reflection. Well, what is he telling us? He was the first, to my
knowledge -- and long before sociologists specializing in bureaucracy -- he was the first to
identify the current forms of what one might call neo-bureaucracy. And neo-bureaucracy is not a
pyramid-like bureaucracy at all; it's a bureaucracy of corridors, it's a bureaucracy of segments, a
string of offices. In The Castle, you have the admirable character, Barnabas, whose dream is to
become a messenger, at the bottom of the bureaucracy; he asks for a very small post. And he
goes from office to office to office to office, in a straight line, horizontally, and he tells the story
of his passage, etc.12
The same move as for the castle, you have it in Amerika, in an extraordinary text where Kafka
describes -- but then it takes an art to arrive at that description – in which, if you will, as the
description advances, our reader's eye is like in a kaleidoscope; it's the scene that changes, and
yet it's the same scene. He describes the castle, uh… not the castle, he describes a house… uh…
which is the house of… his uncle, the house of the hero's uncle and, again, at first, we believe
that it is a kind of pyramidal house and everything happens as if, as the text unfolds, everything
occurs as if the pyramidal house was laying on its side, becoming a kind of corridor which
stretches out the rooms. Everything changes. This, I would say, is the transition from the old
archaic imperial bureaucracy to the neo-bureaucracy, to modern bureaucracy.
And that’s what struck me about Kafka. If you will, why did a movie guy like Orson Welles so
fully, so fully grasp Kafka's meaning? Because this only works with encounters, all of that. It’s
not because Orson Welles read Kafka better than, than others; it’s not because he reads better

                                                                                                      21

than Marthe Robert, that's not why.13 Reading better is a matter of talent, it is not a question of…
uh… [Deleuze does not complete this] But, what explains the encounter… er… the Orson
Welles-Kafka encounter? It’s not complicated. Suppose, I don't know, that even Kafka only
read... that Orson Welles only read Kafka late in life. How did he function before, Orson Welles?
It’s very weird. Whether they were phantasms or not, what were those things that were his very
own? His very own things are not complicated; he had like two ... two dynamic directions that he
placed into all his films, but with all the expressive variations you want. He had two main
themes, that is, he must live frantically. What are his two main themes? And technically, in the
cinema, obviously, that produces something different than in writing. And, to each film, you can
assign techniques of camera perspective, techniques ... er ... really optical techniques.

His first major theme was space, vertical space (en hauteur) ... so, that can occur ... yes, space
that flees vertically. And his other great theme is a longitudinal line of flight. The dominant
space, if you will, by schematizing both, the dominant space of imperialisms is the longitudinal
line of flight. If I choose films by Welles arbitrarily..., not arbitrarily in quality, but films like
that, at random, it is obvious that, from his first films onward, these two spaces enter, or these
two spatial elements enter into incredible combinations. I mean, the beauty of what he gets out of
these, of these two great axes of space, it's ... it's fantastic.

If I take a film that is not by Orson Welles, the famous Third Man, in which we see that he was
not content just to act, but that he obviously inspired the film, that he inspired the images… that
it's signed Welles. This is not complicated; it is the extraordinary life and skill, it is not copying,
so he had to get involved, through which you find combined the images of great Viennese hotels
all vertical with a spiral staircase or the Third Man's Ferris wheel, if you remember, which then
defines a space, in fact, which is going to be the space of imperial domination, because that's
where Orson Welles at one point thinks about eliminating his buddy by throwing him off the
Ferris wheel. So, these spaces, all at great height and dominance and then the space of the sewers
which graze the earth, and which will define a longitudinal line of flight of the Third Man’s hero.
If I take The Lady from Shanghai, think about the contrasting value… I mean, what is lyricism,
lyrical values in the cinematographic image? You find the whole theme, for example -- uh, I
haven't seen it for a long time so ... -- there is the whole theme of ... uh ... of the space of heights,
for example, Rita Hayworth who is diving … who plunges completely from the top of a rock,
there… the dive corresponds, it refers completely to the Ferris wheel of the Third Man. And
then, you have longitudinal space; there is a beautiful image in The Lady from Shanghai in which
I no longer know who is running; there is a beach where there are kinds of cabins or motels that
look out onto a wooded pathway. There are all these people are coming out of ... their holes, their
little houses, coming together while something is going on in the longitudinal pathway, and this
appears like a kind of movement of flight.
In, uh, in The Trial, the way in which he manipulated that space, for example, if you remember
the scene of the little girls running and the painter… uh… of Titorelli and the perverted little
girls, the way they run into a kind of… space that is really formed by a sort of hedgerow, a kind
of very long openwork box, and they run laughing, shouting, and it's a kind of flight,

                                                                                                      22

movement… it’s very, very fast, very beautiful. And, conversely, there is the whole tribunal
space which is very ambiguous, since, also seen from a distance, it looks like a space of heights,
but, as soon as one approaches it, it’s clear that this is not the case; it's like rooms strung
together one after the other.

So, there, you have…, and there, we have introduced what I would like us to start developing
today: that introduces this kind of passage from one bureaucracy… When one of the great
specialists on China… er… on archaic China, namely [Etienne] Balazs, b-a-l-a-z-s, names his
book -- or his [inaudible word], I don't remember -- La bureaucratie celeste [The celestial
bureaucracy], that means something.14 It means: this expresses the bureaucracy of the archaic
Empires. And this archaic bureaucracy, in my opinion, is easy to account for with the categories
that we have tried to identify. It is this bureaucracy of heights, it is the construction of a pyramid,
a pyramid, if you will, whose summit would be the despotic function, the base would be the
communities occupying the different territories -- notice that the top overcodes the base, that is,
the aggregate of the territories compared -- and the… the sides… the sides of the pyramid would
be the different aspects of the civil service. In our case, it would be more of a trihedron, you can
imagine; we could always find a fourth, a fifth, a fifth side, etc.

So, there it would be fine. Today, it goes without saying that our bureaucracy has retained
something of this aspect. For example, it thrills me greatly that at the time of ... at the start of the
Soviet revolution, when the Futurists embarked on some truly great bureaucratic projects,
namely the plans, plans for ... er ... architectural plans for … uh… the central committee, for…
this, that, they again adopted, even if it meant… -- that did not prevent what they were doing
from being very, very creative -- they again adopted the large model of the tower by introducing
into this ... [Deleuze does not complete this], and at that time, the tower projects flourished. But
one can think that, at the same time, other bureaucratic elements were developing their seeds and
introducing a completely different space.

And furthermore, if I come back to Kafka’s The Castle, to be done with this, perhaps you
remember that the castle is only a castle in appearance and seen from afar. As soon as you
approach, it looks more like a series of hovels. But, if you remember, moreover, the castle
functionaries do not carry on their activity – so it seems, as far as can be discerned -- do not carry
out their activity in the castle itself, but go into a hotel, and the functionaries at the hotel… the
hotel then, from near or far, is no longer a castle at all, it's a row of pitiful rooms, and it is there
that the real business gets done. In other words, the hotel vertically has replaced the castle
horizontally, which means, at the most ... at the simplest, if you will, there is indeed a new
bureaucracy which passes through the contiguity of the offices, the horizontal contiguity of
offices, and which is no longer the celestial bureaucracy, which is a bureaucracy of a completely
different type. So, despite everything, it's great, it's ... that doesn’t keep it from ... whatever you
want ... Any mix can occur.
If you take a huge architectural ensemble today, a modern one, for example, in America… uh…
you could very well have the CEO at the top of the tower. Ah, that's aaah ... At that point, he
takes on the old office of despotic Emperor. There we are… Uh… One of Kafka’s jokes -- I hope
he didn't do it every day, because it would have been monotonous -- it's: he worked, you know,

                                                                                                     23

in a kind of large social insurance center of the Austrian Empire. When he… in Prague. When he
walked into the foyer, right, he would make the sign of the cross, the cross, he who was a Jew, he
made the sign of the cross, and he genuflected to show that this was it, the Temple of… [Deleuze
does not complete this] It must have been frowned upon, it must have lowered its rating,
[Laughter] but… uh… well, that's the call to the celestial bureaucracy.
But, at the same time, the power centers -- to speak of powers there, as they are swarmed ...
when there are powers, for me, they are by nature swarmed within assemblages; they never
require ... they really are quite secondary determinations. -- In a modern bureaucratic
assemblage, the centers of power are much more in the relationship of an office to the adjoining
office than in the hierarchical, vertical relationship. And, where Kafka, really, has been, once
again, had understood everything beforehand, is that when modern sociologists deal with
bureaucracies -- in particular, there are many Americans who work on bureaucracy -- they show
this very well, how the contiguity of offices undermines ... -- of course, all of this gets
rediscovered, the cause is the same -- but, if necessary, undermines, it's like a double grid, the
orders, the hierarchical orders which go from the highest to the lowest, there is a whole
relationship of offices contiguous with each other that, if necessary, will implicate not a force of
resistance or inertia in relation to orders coming from above ... [End of tape] [1: 45: 58]
Part 4
… a dislocation from one office in relation to the other in which the order is transformed
horizontally, where the order that ... not only, there is the transformation of the order according
to the hierarchical scale from top to bottom, but there are modulations, modifications when one
passes from one office to another, such that a file ... You must consider the double path: the
celestial path, the celestial circuit of the archaic imperial bureaucracy, from top to bottom, and
the longitudinal path from one office to another. It's not the same bureaucracy. And yet, it can be
the same people participating in both. But, you see, we are at the border of two different
assemblages. So, it’s onto this point that we almost were connecting. If you grant me this,
whatever your agreements or disagreements might be ... What time is it?
A student: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: What?
The student: Twelve twenty.
Deleuze: Twelve twenty, so we'll finish soon. If you grant me this description of the despotic
imperial assemblage, just this once you will grant me this, even though I haven't said much about
it yet, it's not at all the same thing as the tyrant of a City, not at all the same as the dictator of a
modern State; there’s no relation. Once again, the despot has been defined as being exclusively a
public function under the conditions of this archaic Empire assemblage, and we attempted to
describe this assemblage.
Well, once again, I am summing everything up in negative form by saying: but on this point,
there is neither "for oneself," nor a private determination. So we collide… -- we can translate it

                                                                                                   24

in… er…, in an almost evolutionary form, but we remove from it what is evolutionist therein –
we collide with the question: so then, where can the “for oneself” of private property come from,
which will nevertheless be fundamental in the… in… in the entire State apparatus? We began by
describing a State apparatus assemblage that does not include any determination of private
property. All property is public there. In fact, municipal possession of territories, despotic
ownership of land, delegation of ownership to functionaries: there is absolutely no private owner
in this. The functionary enjoys ... income or tenure only insofar as being a functionary, that is,
through the function he performs, but not insofar as being a person.
So, that becomes a real problem: where can private property come from? Well, if you will, to
proceed well, to proceed in order, I would say: we have, in principle, we managed to define very
broadly a State apparatus assemblage under the category of the archaic Empire. Everything that
we then discover is going to be revealed as varieties of the State apparatus. Will these varieties
be or are they evolving? We leave that question for the moment. No doubt, for more
convenience, we will act as if they were evolutionary because it is more convenient in expressing
ourselves, but I completely set aside the question of knowing whether there has been a historical
evolution or if it is something other than an evolution.
And the question is: where can private property come from? Once we’ve said: we have as a point
of reference ... it’s that our States, and as far as our memory goes back, since we do not have the
memory of archaic Empires ... uh ... as far as our memory goes back: well, States function within
a type of assemblage that operates a mixture of public and private. So, where does the sphere of
"for oneself" come from in States? Where does the sphere of private property come from in
States? And this is the question I asked last time, and although we’ve considered all of its
aspects, we don't see yet.
If I am summarizing the entirety of this: who can have, here, both an interest in private property -
- I am indeed saying "interest" -- or find a power in private property, once it’s said that the desire
for private property is going to be something else, since the desire for private property is but one
with the emergence of private property in a new type of assemblage, the type of assemblage we
are looking for? But nobody can; at first glance, nobody. I am saying: the despot’s entire interest,
once the imperial assemblage exists, his entire interest is to continue within that assemblage. For
the functionary, it’s even clearer. The functionary receives income from the land granted to him.
This land is used by the municipalities. The municipalities give the functionary an annuity
(rente) in kind and in work. It is obvious that the functionary insofar as being a functionary has
no interest in transforming such a regime, since, moreover, this regime is the basis of his
existence as functionary. It would be suicide. As the author I was quoting said, a specialist in the
Chinese Empire, as [Ferenc] Tökei said: it is conceivable that functionaries might become little
despots, that is, create despotic domains, … uh ... separate, autonomous, but absolutely
inconceivable that they would become private owners. It is as if they are being invited to
overturn the very basis of their social existence. So, neither the despot, nor the functionary, nor
the member of the municipality who, as a member of the municipality, has possession of the
territory, absolutely no one, in such a system, has an interest in private property.

                                                                                                  25

Where can that come from? So, this is what I was saying: this article or this text by Tökei seems
very good to me, because it answers…, I said it the last time, well, it tells us something very
curious, it seems to me. He tells us: well you understand, it's not difficult, we have to find… --
it's almost, there, a… a very important methodological point; the text is very, very well done , by
Tökei ... -- he said: we would have to find someone, a social character who, at the same time, is
part of the archaic Empire and is not encompassed therein, an excluded yet included character.
Excluded people in the pure state, that’s not difficult: these are outlaws, outcasts. But someone
who is both caught up in the archaic Empire and yet not included within it, what can it be? It is
neither the despot, nor the functionary, nor the member of a municipality, nor even the slave. For
the slave is like everything in the archaic Empire; it is what Marx called, rather than private
slavery, in opposition to this, he called it generalized slavery. And generalized slavery is simply
the fact that municipalities as municipalities, that peasant municipalities as municipalities, had
slaves or else the fact that there were slaves delegated to functionaries, that is, function slaves,
attached to one function or another. So, here again, this is public slavery; it’s absolutely not the
private slavery of the ancient City. This is why we speak of the archaic Empire in contrast,
among other things, with the ancient City.
So, who? Whose interest is it in? That will not be enough to explain the birth of private property,
but, if we manage to show that there is indeed a type of collective character who is both caught
in the archaic Empire and not included in the Empire, we will have something like a possible
hypothesis. And the answer that I find very beautiful from Tökei is: well yes indeed, it is the
slave, but the freed slave. It’s the freed slave. What does he mean? The freed slave arises as …,
which is a product of the archaic Empire, but is produced in the archaic Empire and is not
encompassed by it. He no longer has social status. He is produced in the archaic Empire as
without-status (hors-statut). If I dared to say this, I would say: he is produced with the
overcoding, but as uncoded. Indeed, the freed slave, this is awful; he no longer has any status
and, as Tökei says -- that's why, the last time, I followed up on the problem of lament and the
elegy – he’s the one who initiates his lament, and the Chinese elegy begins with this collective
movement of freed slaves.
Fine. Let’s extend the “Tokei hypothesis”; let’s extend the hypothesis. He says: is it by chance
that it is the freed slave who will become a private owner? And not only will he become a private
owner, but he will become a master in the dual fields of commerce and crafts; if you prefer, of
market currency and business, private property, private enterprise? Moreover, it is the freed slave
who, in China, will bring the first seeds of private slavery, that is, he will have the right to bond
his slaves to himself in a private capacity, especially for metallurgical work, for mining work.
Fine. This is a very odd story.
That should make us think of something, and here, it is not by chance, of course, that Tökei is a
Marxist. Because, in Marx, there is a remark that he does not invent since Marx is not a specialist
in Roman history, and that he draws from historians of Roman history of the 19th century. This
is the following story: we are told that the Roman plebs have a long history and that, in
particular, the plebs were an essential factor in the demise of the old Etruscan royalty which was
quite ... , the old Etruscan kingship, was very much of the pattern and type of the archaic Empire.

                                                                                                      26

Well, the plebs supposedly were an essential factor in the destruction of the old royalty for the
benefit of the Republic.
And how is the plebeian distinguished from the patrician in archaic Rome? He is distinguished in
this way: the patrician is a member through lineage or through community; he forms the Roman
people, populus romanus. The Roman people, above all, is not the plebeians; it is the patricians.
And how is he defined? He has the right to exploit, the right to exploit the public domain which
the Latins call: ager publicus, a-g-e-r, the field, publicus. The patrician is the member through
lineage or community who has the right to exploit the ager publicus. You see? [Pause] There is
no private property at all, to the extent that it would be a fundamental misunderstanding to say:
the patricians were the rich who had private property. History has taken quite other paths. They
have the right to exploit the ager publicus which remains the property of either the community or
the property of the King, the eminent property of the King, whatever you want. This is a model
outline. It’s a schematic of… archaic Empire, or itinerant community, at the extreme; it's a mix
of them both.
The plebeian, first of all, who is he? All historians agree that all or part, at least in part, plebeians
are freed slaves. Not only so; they are also conquered foreigners, whose territory has been
conquered, uh… it's also people who are, uh… who have arrived, migrants, etc., but everyone
says that plebeians are partly freed slaves. And, as freed slaves, they are excluded from all public
rights. Excluded from all public rights, that's essential. We find exactly the freed Chinese slave
and the Roman plebeian. There, there is a great identity of status. They are excluded from all
public rights in exchange for what? They and they alone have the power, as they say in Roman
law, to assign ownership of the ager publicus. They assign ownership of the ager publicus to the
extent that they are excluded from public property, that is, to the extent that they do not have the
right to exploit ager publicus like the patricians. What does that mean, they assign ownership of
the ager publicus? This means: they receive in compensation a parcel of the ager publicus by
rights. It is not necessarily from the existing ager publicus; they are granted a part not yet
exploited, for example, a piece of land, of which they are private owners. [Pause]
And we only find the same figure for the freed Chinese slave, whatever the difference in the
contexts, namely, it is the plebeian who has the legal possibility of becoming the private owner
of a plot of land, who has the legal possibility to get involved in trade and to manage enterprises,
in particular, metallurgical. If you will, it is at the level of the freed slave or the plebeian that the
triple privatization takes place. You will tell me -- I am specifying so, uh ... so that there really is
no mistake here -- you will tell me: but freed slaves, that already assumes the existence of slaves,
and slaves were private property. I remind you that’s not the case. The freed slave assumes
public slaves, slaves of municipalities or slaves of functionaries who are freed after a long
process and who are without-status, who had status as long as they were slaves, a public status,
but who become without-status. And it is, it is these freedmen who will become at once private
owners, small private owners of plots of land, small entrepreneurs, small merchants, almost in ...
outside the mesh or under the mesh of imperial overcoding. In other words, they are the ones
who will cause the flows of private appropriation to flow in contrast with the archaic pole of
public appropriation.

                                                                                                                    27

While it is the Chinese freedman, whether it is the Roman plebeian, that, at that moment, there is
a germ that will work through the States, the archaic States, namely a kind of phenomenon which
both grows from within and escapes imperial overcoding. And we can see very well ... You will
tell me: but it's still weird, this kind of accident where it is the Empire itself which produces
[this]. It is this totally bizarre character, in fact, and who throughout history is obviously
aggrieved, namely, he is both in the Empire, but he is produced in the Empire as excluded
through the overcoding of Empire. He has no social status. And it is at this level that
privatizations begin to take shape, and then the history will ... will precipitate the course, will
precipitate the pace.
So, in fact, it should be said that this is not surprising, because if you take the two assemblages
that were our starting points – first, the code-territory assemblages, the assemblage of itinerance;
second, the overcoding-land assemblage, the assemblage of archaic Empire -- could we not say
this, that imperial overcoding necessarily entails – this is a possible hypothesis -- necessarily
entails as a repercussion, as a correlate, some decoding of flows? At the same time as it
overcodes flows, a kind of decoding occurs as a countermove. As long as we were dealing with a
territory-code type of assemblage, the territorial flows were ... were relatively coded, with
relative flexibility. An imperial overcoding apparatus gets introduced that will overcode all of
these codes and overcode all of these territories turning them into land. Suddenly, these now
overcoded streams, well, a part or several of them, tend to escape. And, when the land is
overcoded as public appropriation, at the same time the land flow partially tends to decode.
When activity is overcoded as public works, a flow of land tends toward being partially decoded.
When money is overcoded and therefore created in the form of taxes, a monetary flow tends to
be decoded. And it is these decoded flows that will constitute the flow of private property, the
flow of private enterprise, the flow of private commerce.
And that would remain completely unintelligible if we could not assign a type of collective
character who is precisely on the hinge of this overcoding and decoding of flows. If you will,
when flows get overcoded ... uh, we must always remember that "decoding" does not mean a
flow whose code is encompassed; on the contrary, it means: a decoded flow is a flow whose … It
is a flow which is no longer encompassed within its own code, which is no longer contained in
its own code, which escapes its own code. In fact, one can assign within the archaic Empire the
point where the overcoded flows tend through compensation to be decoded, and this point is this
point of the plebs or of the freed slave. There you go, well… yes… [End of the session] [2: 08:
30]
Notes

  Let us note that this session’s transcription differs entirely from the presumably corresponding text at WebDeleuze
where the transcription is, in fact, from the 29 January 1980 session, that is, the week after this current session. As
such, our transcription is currently the only extant copy of the 22 January 1980 session while the translation, of
course, is original to the Deleuze Seminars site.
  On this point, see A Thousand Plateaus, plateau 13, pp. 439-440 (Mille plateaux, pp. 548-549).
  On the “final love” in Proust and “the work to be completed”, see A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 438-439 (Mille
plateaux, pp. 546-547).

                                                                                                                    28

  On Mumford and the megamachine, see session 2, 13 November 1979.
  This certainly refers to the seminar that took place during 1975-76 (ATP I) from which a great number of sessions
were filmed by Italian television RAI-3 through the efforts of Deleuze’s student Marielle Burkhalter, including
segments of approximately a dozen meetings, with the transcripts and translations presented under the heading A
Thousand Plateaus I – Deleuze at Paris 8 (Video Links). This seminar and subsequent ones no doubt were developed
by Deleuze and Guattari into Plateau 7, “Year Zero: Faciality”, in A Thousand Plateaus.
  Jacques Mercier, Rouleaux magiques éthiopiens, Ed. du Seuil, 1979; Ethiopian Magic Scrolls, trans. Richard
Pevear (New York: Braziller, 1979); see A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 533-534 note 14; (Mille plateaux, p. 224, note
12).
  Alain Grosrichard, Structure du sérail : La fiction du despotisme asiatique dans l’occident classique, Ed. du Seuil,
1979.
  The majority of transcriptions into French and corresponding translations into English were made possible through
access to the recordings available from the Bibliothèque Nationale de France (BNF), then through the Paris-8 Voix
de Deleuze site, faithfully produced over nearly a decade by one participant in Deleuze’s seminars, Hidenobu
Suzuki. According to François Dosse in Gilles Deleuze, Félix Guattari: Intersecting Lives (Columbia University
Press, 2011), Suzuki “becomes an institution all to himself”, to whom Deleuze would refer colleagues if they
weren’t able to attend one of the sessions. I should note that 1979-80 is the first year of Suzuki’s recordings, and
also that if this is indeed Suzuki speaking (which seems likely given his proximity to the microphone), this is one of
his rare interventions in Deleuze’s seminar.
  Deleuze refers to nexum several times in A Thousand Plateaus, in relation to Dumézil, p. 552 note 1 (Mille
plateaux, p. 435 note 1), and in the context of the link or knot, p. 460 (Mille plateaux, p. 575).
   Deleuze provides this reference – Jean Paris, L’Espace et le regard (Paris : Le Seuil, 1965), I.ii – in A Thousand
Plateaus, pp. 184-185 (Mille plateaux, p. 227).
   Deleuze develops the landscape concept and the face-landscape contrast in three plateaus in A Thousand Plateaus,
plateau 7 “Year Zero: Faciality”, notably pp. 170-190 (Mille plateaux, pp. 211-214, 218-230); plateau 10, on
becomings, and plateau 11 “1837: Of the refrain”.
   On The Castle and bureaucracy, A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 213-214 (Mille plateaux, pp. 260-261).
   The French critic Marthe Robert wrote Alone like Franz Kafka (Seul comme Franz Kafka, Calmann-Lévy, 1969).
   Balazs’s La bureaucratie céleste (Paris : Gallimard, 1968) is apparently a revised and updated edition of an earlier
translation in English entitled Chinese Civilization and Bureaucracy; Variations on a Theme. (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1964). Translated by H. M. Wright. Edited by Arthur F. Wright.