1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Foucault, 1985-1986

Part I: Knowledge (Historical Formations)

Lecture 08, 17 December 1985

Transcribed by Annabelle Dufourcq; additional revisions and time stamp, Charles J.
Stivale

Translated by Samantha Bankston; additional revisions, Charles J. Stivale

Part 1

So, you see what the problem is. It coincides well with the end of the term. It’s... after painting a
kind of picture of knowledge along Foucault’s lines, we were almost pushed... I mean, it wasn't a
matter of will, it wasn't… we truly were pushed towards a second domain, that of power. And I
mean: I have a feeling that this is also what happened to Foucault. Meaning, he actually started
with an epistemology, or with an attempt to construct a doctrine of knowledge, and it was this
doctrine of knowledge that literally pushed him towards the discovery of a new domain, which
would become that of power. So much so that what we were already looking for last time was a
kind of transition that caused us to shift from knowledge to power, and we proceeded by making
a series of remarks, the most concrete remarks possible. And for today, we suggested closely
examining a particular passage, because it is a mysterious passage from The Archaeology of
Knowledge. You see, ultimately, it’s always been very embarrassing to answer the question, if
this question was ever asked, but come on, come on, come on, come on: give us an example of a
statement. At least now we know why we were embarrassed, such that we're no longer
embarrassed. It is very, very difficult to give an example of a statement.

In fact, statements are distinct from words, sentences and propositions, but at the same time, they
are completely immanent to them. I cannot give an example of a statement without passing
through what the statement is not, namely words, sentences and propositions. So, every time that
I am asked for an example of a statement, I will only be able to provide a sentence or a
proposition and explain why the statement is different from the sentence itself. But since it
doesn’t exist outside of a sentence, it is very difficult for me to give an example. Accordingly, if
someone held fast to their demand—give an example, an example of a statement! — Foucault
would respond as he does in The Archaeology of Knowledge, and that’s what should be the focus
of our session today. He would respond: A Z E R T, azert.1 So, obviously, memories flood back
to us. We say to ourselves, ah yes, the Stoics, for example, had a secret word, this secret word
was blituri, it was a wonderfully magical word. [Pause] For the Stoics, “blituri” refers to a word
that has no meaning. So, is "azert", in this sense, the secret statement, A Z E R T? That is why
pages 109-114 [82-87] from The Archaeology, which I asked you to read, if possible, should be
analyzed very closely.2

                                                                                                     2

On page 109, I will quote Foucault's first remark. The point is to demonstrate that a statement
does not necessarily imply a grammar or syntax. And, to demonstrate this, he tells us: an
equation is a statement. And he adds: a curve is a statement, “A graph, a growth curve, an age
pyramid, a distribution cloud are all statements” (p.109) [82]. An equation and a curve are
statements. Can we say the inverse? We want to say the inverse. In any case, I immediately want
to say the inverse. But under what conditions is this legitimate? Every statement is a curve. It
would be important for us, it would be interesting, very interesting for us, because it would be a
way of insisting on the irreducibility of the statement to the sentence. Maybe if the curve were
stated it would involve a sentence, but this wouldn't be the same sentence, it would be the curve
of the sentence. But what is that, the curve of a sentence? Alright, let's move on.

On pages 113-114 [85-86], he tells us a little more. Because he tells us what a statement is and
what it isn’t, using even more unusual examples than the previous ones. A curve is a statement.
This tells us a little more, because he is saying what a statement is and what it isn’t. What does
not constitute a statement? Letters picked at random. Literally, a handful of letters. A handful of
letters is not a statement. Letters that are picked at random literally do not constitute a statement.
Um, you see this intelligent game: Scrabble, yeah? You take a handful of letters, you have a
handful of letters in your hand: that's not a statement. Fine. [Pause] However, if you copy the
letters that you drew at random down on a sheet of paper: that’s a statement. If you copy them
down, then it becomes a statement. We have to go slowly because he’s telling us something
funny. If I write down this handful of letters, if I reproduce them on a sheet of paper, then it is a
statement. A statement of what? A statement of a series of letters with no law other than that of
chance. We have to remember this: a statement of a series of letters with no law other than that
of chance. But my handful of letters is not a statement.

Or else -- and you can see that this example is equivalent -- the letters on the keyboard of a
typewriter. A Z E R T. These are the first letters on the keyboard of French typewriters. These
letters on the keyboard of a typewriter are not a statement. If I copy them down or say them, then
it becomes a statement. A statement of what? It is the statement of the order of letters on a
French machine. There you go. Suddenly, questions abound, and we think we understand.
[Pause] Fine, but before you even begin to think you understand, you have to see how it ends.
 Look, you recall, right? My handful of letters is not a statement, but if I copy them onto a sheet
of paper, then it becomes a statement. If I copy them onto a sheet of paper or say them, it's a
statement. A Z E R T on the keyboard is not a statement. If I say “A Z E R T” or write it down
on a sheet of paper, then it is a statement.

On p. 117 [89], he concludes: “A series of signs …” -- In fact, the letters from Scrabble or the
letters on a keyboard are already a series of signs, they’re not yet statements – so, “A series of
signs will become a statement on condition that it possesses ‘something else’,” -- “on the
condition that it contains ‘something else’,” -- in parentheses: “‘something else’ (which may be
strangely similar to it, and almost identical, as in the example chosen)” -- “‘[S]omething else,’
(which may be strangely similar to it …)”, this is very, very strange, and that is pure Foucault,
“'something else’ (which may be strangely similar to it, and almost identical …” -- So: “A series
of signs will become a statement on condition that it possesses ‘something else’ (which may be
strangely similar to it, and almost identical, as in the example chosen), a specific relationship that
concerns itself.” You see: a series of signs, A Z E R T, becomes a statement on the condition that

                                                                                                    3

it contains “something else”… What is the “something else”? The same signs on the keyboard,
which are not themselves a statement, yet the statement is strangely similar and almost identical.

Why do I say “this is pure Foucault”? It's pure Foucault, because if there's something, a
problem, a running problem, or an amusing problem… a fascinating problem that haunted him;
everyone has problems that fascinate them, and for Foucault it's the problem of the double. What
is a double? And we won’t be able to get anywhere in our attempt to explicate Foucault if we
don’t pass through this issue, which is the issue of the double, and the problem of the double.
And that haunts him, it haunted him from beginning to end. What is a double? What does it mean
to have a double? So, yeah, something else “strangely similar” and yet other, “strangely similar
and quasi-identical.” This is a first for us: the first time we see the existence of the double
surface in Foucault. The statement is the double of something that is “strangely similar and
quasi-identical” to it. AZERT. The statement “AZERT” is the double of “AZERT” on the
keyboard. And yet one is not a statement, while the other is a statement.

Well, then we say to ourselves, OK, we get it, he’s saying something banal. What would it be
like to say something banal? It would be, for instance, saying something like: for there to be a
statement, well, it has to be spoken or written. So, the letters on the keyboard are not a statement,
but if I say the letters on the keyboard or write them down on a sheet of paper, then I am making
a statement. To make a statement would imply: speaking or writing. In other words, it would be
talking about something that exists. In other words, it would mean: for there to be a statement,
there has to be a copy. I have to copy the sequence of letters as they are on the keyboard, or I
have to copy the letters that I picked at random. At that time, there would be a statement. This is
stupid. Why is it stupid? If only because the keyboard itself, containing the letters that are not
themselves a statement, is itself is a copy. Every French machine copies the French model of that
machine. So if there is a copy of the conditions of enunciation, then we’d have to say: the letters
on the keyboard are already statements. So that doesn’t work.

Would it be better to say: well, yes, we understand that in order for there to be a statement, there
has to be a designation, and when I copy the letters from the keyboard I have a statement,
because I have an instance where something is designated, and what is this something? Well, it is
an instance that designates something else that is strangely similar and quasi-identical, namely:
the letters on the keyboard.

So, I would say, at this point: yes, there is a statement when there is something that designates.
Or, what comes down to the same thing from this point of view: there is a statement when there
is something that signifies. And I would say: the designated “A Z E R T” on the keyboard is not
a statement; however, when I copy it on paper…You see, I am no longer defining the statement
by the condition of copying, I am defining it by the condition of designating, because the second
series designates the first strangely similar and quasi-identical. That would be stupid too. Why?
It would not be stupid on one condition, which would be if I were able to define the designation
or signification without presupposing anything about the statement. Maybe it's possible, I don't
know at all … [Interruption of the recording without any missing text]

Maybe it's possible, I don't know at all since, the statement is presupposed in traditional
definitions of designation and signification. So, I cannot define the statement by designation, nor

                                                                                                      4

by signification, for the simple reason that these are dimensions of the statement that presuppose
the statement itself. The statement itself is what designates. The statement itself is what
designates. My second remark, after having thought that I understood the matter too quickly,
well, it collapsed.

Someone will say to me: well, the statement must be defined by what all the other dimensions
presuppose, both the designation and the signification, namely: the statement must be defined as
a signifying chain, because the signifying chain does not presuppose the statement; it is
constitutive, or it can pass for being constitutive. That doesn’t work this time either! Because if I
define the statement by the signifying chain, what will prevent me from saying that the
signifying chain is already on the keyboard? And now I'm back to square one. And, going back
to square one is like saying... I take my head in my hands and I say to myself: what is this
“something else”? If the statement is fundamentally related to something else that is strangely
similar and quasi-identical, then this “something else” is neither a designated, nor a signified, nor
a signifier. What could it be? We're starting over. So, this long path we took—how did it serve
us? We used it to create impasses. We know that we can't, we can't… And then a word emerges,
a word that Foucault... to which Foucault attaches a lot of importance, but that, oddly enough, he
barely comments on.

It’s enough simply to take a look at the table of contents at the beginning of The Archaeology of
Knowledge, and we see that, basically, the first major part—since it is the title of a part and not
of a chapter—is called “Discursive Regularities”. Discursive regularities. And then we see that,
in the last part, in a chapter, Chapter 2 of the fourth part is called “The Original and the Regular”.
And what is the theme of this chapter on the Original and the Regular? Basically, it consists in
saying that when you want to define a statement, and he doesn't say that it's unimportant, but
when you want to define a statement, there's something that is unimportant, which is the criterion
of the original versus the banal. When you want to know... again, you shouldn't go too fast,
because you shouldn't conclude that Foucault is saying that a proposition said a thousand times,
or a statement said a thousand times is a new statement. No, he says that the criterion of novelty
or banality doesn't constitute the statement itself. A banal statement is no less a statement than
an original statement. In other words, “banal/original” is not a relevant distinction when it comes
to knowing what a statement is.

This matters to us. Why? Because we saw that the statement was related to “one speaks”.
[Pause] Well, the “one” is no more banal than original. The “one” is not the “one” of banality.
The distinction between banal and original is not relevant to the “one speaks” as a condition of
any enunciation. Good. So, the statement is neither banal nor original, it is regular. “Regular”,
what does that mean? That it obeys rules. What are these rules? We saw that these are very
specific rules when we commented on the nature of the statement… we felt the need... I felt the
need to borrow [William] Labov’s term “facultative rules” as opposed to “obligatory rules”.3
Thus, these are strange rules. Not every rule is a rule of enunciation. No doubt the statement
involves very specific rules, the very rules that have been called “facultative rules”. The fact
remains that the statement is a regularity. Alright. That would be like saying: alright, it's a
regularity, not just any regularity. So, it seems that, when I said, “facultative rule”, it implied for
us that these rules are defined in relation to something, but in relation to what? Which would not

                                                                                                     5

be the same as obligatory rules. In other words, the enunciative rules are defined in relation to
what? In relation to what? Not the original, not the banal.

The rules themselves are defined in relation to what? Now we'll move on, maybe. Maybe…I’ll
say: enunciative rules are rules that are defined in relation to singularities. They’re in relation to
singularities. Ha! I seem surprised that I've made so much progress. And yes. Because: wouldn't
this already be a way of confirming the distinction between facultative and obligatory rules?
Facultative rules concern singularities that they regularize. While obligatory rules always
concern the universal. That would be convenient. That would be a solid confirmation. But we’ll
leave that. Enunciative rules would concern singularities. I will say right away that Foucault
rarely uses the word “singularities”, but he does use it. For example, in “The Discourse on
Language”, you’ll find the following sentence: the “logos […] elevating singularities into
concepts,” to the level of the concept.4 And understand, even if you cut out the context, he is
critiquing the logos, because the concept is universal. The logos elevates singularities to the level
of the concept, that is, it transforms them into universals.

Then, here and there, Foucault uses the word “singular”, or “singularity”, but at the same time
we cannot say that he makes a big deal out of their terminology. I think what happens is even
more beautiful. You know, among philosophers there are always two kinds of terms at the
terminological level. There are terms whose importance is explicitly noted, [Pause] such as
“statement” for Foucault. In this case, he explicitly tells you: Take note—what I mean by
“statement” is not what it is meant by “sentence” or “proposition”. And then there are terms that
the philosopher doesn’t feel like s/he needs… that s/he uses and does not feel the need to tell you
to “pay attention”. And s/he slips it into some part of a sentence, like it’s no big deal. It's up to
you to sort out for yourselves. At that moment, these concepts are no longer explicit concepts to
this philosopher, they’re implicit concepts. They are no longer concepts that announce “look!”,
but are concepts that “wink” or “glance.”

I’m coming back to my theme. There you go. First of all, [Pause; sound of Deleuze moving over
to the blackboard] let’s make it simple, yeah! I mean that sounds like mathematics, but it's not,
it’s not… [Pause; he writes something on the board]. There you go. What did I do? I made an
emission, an emission of singularities, three singularities, there you go. Or, as they say in
mathematics, I marked three singular points. These singular points, as they are…good, I drew
three singular points on a plane. One of the singularities is not on the same line. I could have
made another emission of singularities, I would have… [he writes on the board]. It was a
completely different emission of singularities. That's where I made my emission of singularities,
that one. Then that's all. You will notice that my singular points are indefinite. [Pause] Ahhh.
One more attempt.

I'm going to do something else. [Pause] I’ll do that, and then… Alright. What did I do? There’s a
second figure. To put it simply, I would say: I have united the three singular points. I drew three
lines. Good. We're going very slowly because I think there are tons of traps. The more you think
you’ve understood something right away, the less you will have understood it. At the same time,
if you no longer understand any of this, it's annoying. So, what can I say other than “I have
connected my singular points?” I can say: I have regularized them. I have regularized them.
Indeed, each of the lines is a line of regular points. A line of regular points unites one singularity

                                                                                                      6

to another or, if you prefer, I’ll introduce another term because it will be very useful to us, a
regular line, a line of regular points, or, if you prefer, so I’m multiplying words, a series of
regular points goes from the neighborhood -- this is a mathematical notion, and you don’t need to
know mathematics to know that it holds great mathematical importance -- it goes from the
neighborhood of a single point to the neighborhood of another single point. This is my regular
line.

And the idea of a series appears. So, regularity is a series of points that go from the
neighborhood of one singularity to the neighborhood of another singularity. Good. Can I... can I
conceive..., at this level from before..., in my first figure, over there, my singular points were
indefinite. Over there, when I regularized them, they receive a determination, namely, vertices of
a triangle. But earlier, as indefinite points, they existed as singularities. They were indefinite. I
had three singular points. Can I... Is it necessary that the regularization be triangular? I would say
that triangular regularization is a regularity, that is, a form in which I regularized my singular
points. Is that the only one, or—and let's keep trying to fix the words, the words that will be
extremely important terminologically—was another series possible with the same singular points
than the “triangle” series? Oh yes, well yes, another series was possible. We see one right
away.... [Interruption of the recording] [34:28]

Part 2

… And, in this second regularity -- you see, it's a second regularization -- what will my third
singular point be? My third singular point will be determined—it will be another
determination—will be determined as follows: a point located outside the line AB through which
I will draw a parallel line to AB. It will be [he writes on the board] another regularity. You can
see that regularities are infinite. Because, from that point on, I might as well suggest drawing a
secant. Are you alright?

Alright. I'm sticking to my two series. Practically, you see that I might conceive an infinite
number of series. What is the relationship between my two series? Convergent or divergent?
Meaning, the same family or different families? In other words, you can already see that in my
triangular regularization, I actually have three series. But, strictly speaking, since these three
series are convergent, I can consider them a single series. I'm moving on to regularization. I’m
also treating it like one series. What is the relationship between the two series? Can I extend one
into the other? I don't know in advance. Maybe, maybe. On what condition? On the condition
that a third series is set up, which includes the two previous ones.

Well, you know what it is. If you remember your elementary geometry, you know on what
condition the two series will be extended. The answer is not given. Maybe they aren’t extended.
In some cases, they aren’t extended They’re extended on the condition that you introduce a new
regularization. What will it be? It's… [he writes on the board] If you use one of the vertices of
the triangle to raise the parallel to the opposite side. This will be the condition under which you
will demonstrate that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles. There you go.
You will have made your series converge. Fine. Ah. It's perfect. We’ve found almost everything.
I mean, you can't go wrong in this matter. What can we say now? Well, that's it: a statement is a
regularity; Foucault says it explicitly.

                                                                                                     7

A statement is a regularity. What does that mean? What is it regularizing? It regularizes singular
points. That is why it is a very particular regularity that is called a “facultative regularity”. It
regularizes singular points, and to regularize means “to constitute a series that goes from the
neighborhood of one singular point to the neighborhood of another singular point.” These series
can be multiple. There will be as many statements as there are series. Will these statements
converge? There’s no ready-made answer. You have to wait and see. Yes, if the series converge.
No, if the series diverge. We saw this with “what is a family of statements?” If there is a
convergence of the series, the statements will be from the same family. In other words, the
statement is a regularity, but the emission of singularities is not a statement. The pure emission
of singularities is not a statement. The statement presupposes it. If there is not an emission of
singularities, then there is no statement.

Something else strangely similar and almost identical, what is it? The statement refers to
something else that is strangely similar and almost identical: the emission of singularities. And,
in fact, my indefinite singular points are strangely similar and almost identical to what the
statement will be. The statement simply adds a regular line from the neighborhood of one of
these points to the neighborhood of the other point. In other words, the statement contains
“something else strangely similar and almost identical,” and yet this “something else” is much
different from the statement. The statement is the regularity, it's the series. All statements are
serial.

Parenthetically, this is a great confirmation of a kind of anti-structuralism since Foucault never
stops wanting to substitute the perspective of series for the perspective of structure. So, you can
see that he is offering us a completely different solution. A Z E R T on the keyboard of the
machine is not what the statement means at all. A Z E R T on the machine’s keyboard are the
singularities that the statement will embody, the emission of singularities. When I copy A Z E R
T onto the sheet of paper, I am doing much more than copying or designating what is on the
keyboard. I’m regularizing the singularities. I'm making my series. The same thing goes for the
handful of letters that are picked randomly in the game of Scrabble, and when I copy them down,
I’m doing something other than designating: I’m embodying singularities, I’m regularizing them.

In other words, the small difference, the “something else”, which I’m calling a small
difference—something else that can be strangely similar and almost identical—the small
difference does not pass between the statement and what it is supposed to designate, nor between
the statement and what it is supposed to copy, but between the regularity that it constitutes by
itself and the singularities that it embodies [Pause] or it actualizes. [Pause] There you go.

Take a break. I mean, that has to be clear. What he did was… he did something wonderful, in my
opinion. Within an outdated system of representation, the copy, designation, signification, and
the signifier, he erected a kind of vertical dimension that redistributes everything, creating a new
kind of distribution. So, obviously, what is troubling is that he does not explicitly emphasize this
notion of singularity as much as he would have liked to do. In a way, it's because it’s too close to
him.

And we will see -- I mean we have to wait -- and in my opinion, we will see that in his entire
canon, including at very different levels that no longer have anything to do with the statement,

                                                                                                        8

the notion of singularity is fundamental and for a very simple reason: it is the element of
multiplicities. A multiplicity is a set of singularities, an emission of singularities. And it seems to
me that all of his hatred of the universal and all his criticism of the universal remains
incomprehensible if we do not see what he means, namely that things proceed in singularities. So
why doesn't he develop it? I think because he is able to consider a notion that has already been
attained in mathematics and physics. There you go.

I would like for you to reflect upon it yourselves. Because, if it's not absolutely clear, I'll go over
it again, yeah! I'll go over it again: everything else depends on it, so stay alert for two minutes of
intense reflection. What seems very, very curious to me, and what seems to go without saying,
but, you know, if you want to skip it…you have to fully understand how this no longer has
anything to do with a relation of designation.

If I say: the statement is a regularity that embodies or actualizes singular points, then you must
understand that the serial conception of the statement immediately comes out, along with all of
the problems that accompany it: if we take two statements, can you say whether they are from
the same family or not? Well, they'll be from the same family if you can extend the series of one
into the series of the other. If you can't, they won't be from the same family. You see, everything
depends on this. Ultimately, it’s a vertical construction, and a construction above all… You
have: singularities…there, you could even put them in a kind of sky, we'll see in what sense
elsewhere, but singularities are in a kind of sky. Simply put, universal ideas are not what is in the
sky, but singular points, small stars; it’s in this vertical construction that you have indeterminate
singularities. It is a kind of Platonism of singularity. And then you have the statements that
actualize them, that embody them by constituting series of regular points that go from the
neighborhood of one singularity to the neighborhood of the other and that can go in multiple
ways. Think about it. [Long pause]

Listen, that might seem radical, but if every statement… In fact, what I just tried to show is that
every statement was a curve, and we could successfully draw the reciprocal out from Foucault's
formula: “A curve is a statement.” But conversely, every statement is a curve, a curve what? A
curve that unites singularities. But nothing enables me to claim that all curves are convergent. If
they are not convergent, I cannot say: the totality of curves is convergent. If that were the case, I
would have irreducible families of statements. It is not at all certain that every series will come
together into a single series, even if that series is infinite. [Long pause] No comments?

A woman student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: Oh, well, yes, political examples, we'll get to that soon. Yeah, political examples are
constant here. But I can’t give them yet, because... I can't give them yet, but I promise you that I
will. Actually, we are going to create a schema of non-mathematical curves… of curves
that…yes, that’s right.

But I don't want to leave mathematics right away because I need it. I need it a little bit. Because
there is a great philosopher of mathematics named [Albert] Lautman, L-A-U-T-M-A-N. And in
one of Lautman’s books I came across this: he comments on a famous text by [Henri] Poincaré,
which says, “On curves” … A text by Poincaré called “On curves that are defined by a

                                                                                                      9

differential equation…”5 It doesn’t even matter which “differential equation”; we don't even
need to understand. You will see how we can read mathematics extremely well, even at a very
high level, without losing anything… [Laughter] But… while… above all, there is reason to be
even more modest, because… But you can sense that the differential equation is essential for
philosophy even without having done mathematics. That's what Lautman says. “The theory of
differential equations highlights two absolutely distinct realities.” Now I understand this again.
Good. He announces that differential equations give rise to two heterogeneous, absolutely
distinct realities. “There is a field of directions and topological accidents that can occur here, like
the existence of singular points, for example.” A little further on, he says, “The existence and
distribution of singularities in a vector field defined by the differential equation.”

What don't we understand from that passage? Even if we admit that we don't understand
anything, there's no need to… no need to… “Existence and distribution of singularities,” let's
say, okay, singularities—I’m really doing a minimal job to understand—points, points, points on
a plane, like I did with my three points. I distributed singularities, I made them exist, I distributed
them. “In a vector field defined by the differential equation.” The vector field, where did the
vector field come from? It appeared when I had to choose between two organizations of
singularities. Was I going to put each of them in relation to the other two or was I going to put
the third one solely in relation to other two? These were two vector fields. You see, I don't need
to comment on “vector field”, I just need to recognize it myself.

So, I have an existence and distribution of singularities in a vector field. That's one thing. And
Lautman, along with Poincaré, tells us: and now there is something else and this other thing is
the form of integral curves. As little as you know, you know that this relates differential calculus
to integral calculus. We are told: there is the existence and distribution of singularities, which is
the case in differential equations, but beware, the form of the integral curves is relative to what?
Not to the differential equation, but to the solutions of this equation. Alright. And what is the
form of integral curves? It is what determines singularities. And that is Poincaré's main theme in
this note. Singularities exist and are distributed in a vector field, but as indeterminate points.
Singularities receive their determination from integral curves that pass through their
neighborhood, and everything depends on what the integral curve does to the neighborhood. And
I just have to go back to my example, which was rudimentary, but was shown to be totally
consistent in this respect.

And I would say: in both my cases, I don't have the same integral lines at all. So, in my two
cases, the singularities are not determined in the same way. Since in one case they are
determined in a triangle that I will call an “integral figure”, which passes through the
neighborhood of my three singularities. In the other case, I have a completely different figure:
parallel lines. For the two series to link up with one another and continue in the same series is
possible, but that’s not my concern for the moment. It will be…because, effectively, a third
series is needed in order for them to continue, as we have seen, and on that point Poincaré makes
his great…the points will be determined based on the form that the integral curves take as they
pass through the neighborhood of points. And I’ll reread Lautman: Poincaré distinguishes
between a saddle, which is a determined singularity, nodes, foci and centers. Saddles, nodes, foci
and centers—the words are very pretty, they are the names that singularities take on when they
are determined by integral curves that pass through their neighborhood. Saddles, nodes, foci, and

                                                                                                     10

centers. Saddlesare defined in the following way: saddles are that by which two curves (and only
two curves) are defined by the equation. So: two curves and only two curves. Nodes are where
an infinite number of curves intersect. An infinity of curves. Foci are what curves rotate around
while endlessly approaching them like a spiral. Centers are where curves appear in the form of
closed disks.

Well, it doesn't really matter. You see, we could christen singularities according to our needs and
we will have to christen them. It’s only under the condition of the form of integral curves, or the
equivalent of integral curves, passing through the neighborhood of singularities that singularities
determine themselves or are determined. And, indeed, if we go back to my story and recreate my
pure emission of singularities…There. [He draws on the board]. There. Three indeterminate
singularities. Let’s suppose that we can do better. [He indicates the drawing on the board] I'm
constructing an emission with only one singularity. But that doesn't tell me anything about how
the curve that passes through the neighborhood will look. There we are, one case. I would say,
my singularity here is determined as a vertex. And we can conceive of another case. [Pause as
Deleuze draws on the board]. This is even prettier. Yeah? I can conceive of yet another case…
[Pause] another case. [Pause] What matters to me is that the singularity in these three cases will
be determined differently according to the speed of the curve passing through the neighborhood.

Conclusion: a statement is not a structure, it is a function. It's a function. A function that consists
of what? It consists in regularizing singularities by drawing a curve that passes through the
neighborhood of these singularities. And I see that it is very complicated, and given that the
statement is a function, I can conclude, even immediately deduce, that the statement is serial.
[Pause] With this one-time question: how far will a series go? Thus, the problem that Foucault
posits in the beginning of the Archaeology, from the introduction of The Archaeology of
Knowledge, and his deep interest in modern history as modern history, at least in one aspect
under [Fernand] Braudel’s influence, has built a whole method that is referred to as “serial”.
Establish series of capacities, variable temporalities, once it’s stated that any series is
spatiotemporal. Good. That's the point we’ve reached.

Still, it bothers me. We just distinguished two dimensions. It goes without saying that one does
not exist independently of the other. Finally, singularities without an integral curve, or an
integral curve that passes through their neighborhood: indefinite. Conversely, there is no curve
that does not pass through a neighborhood of singularities. So, one is in the other, but that doesn't
mean they don't differ in nature. The two differ in nature. One does not exist without the other;
there is reciprocal presupposition, there is everything you want. We’re rediscovering all of our
themes from the entire trimester. There is reciprocal presupposition, yes, but there’s still a
difference in nature. There is immanence, yes, and yet there is heterogeneity. So, what would
interest me would be managing to say a little bit more about indeterminate singularities.

What can I say about them? What can I say about them? I can't even say what they consist of. I
can't say: they’re vertices of a triangle, since what constitutes them as the setting for a triangle is
the regularity that embodies them. But can I say something about them in-themselves? What can
I say about AZERT on the keyboard? Ah, what am I going to say about AZERT on the
keyboard? So, I tried because this is much trickier than mathematics. I assure you, I did
everything I could; I wanted a typing manual, I went so far as to call Pigier,6 and they are rather

                                                                                                    11

unpleasant. I absolutely had to… I asked to speak to a typing teacher… I did all of that. I mean, I
should have gone there myself because I came up with nothing, with nothing… So, these are
assumptions I'm forced to make. Hypotheses. But any typist may know…if any of you…
Anyway, what I'm about to say is wrong, but it's easy to correct. You can replace what I say
with the truth, if you find it, [Laughter] but it won't change anything, absolutely anything.

I tell myself: AZERT, well, why is AZERT on French machines? You see, I'm talking about
AZERT on the keyboard. So, I'm putting myself on the level of “pure emissions of singularities.”
What does this depend on? In the case of Scrabble letters, it's very simple, it's very simple
because I would say: it's an emission of chance. There is a relationship between the letters I
draw, and I would say that this relationship is random. Okay, you're going to understand right
away what I'm getting at. But a random relationship is a relation of force. Picking letters at
random is a force relation between those letters. If I draw letters at random, and I have, for
example, A K E, I can't say that these letters are unrelated; they have a relationship, a random
relationship. The random relationship is a force relation between the letters. I'll keep that in mind
in case there's anything to be gained from it. Alright.

The French machine says: AZERT…ah. In my opinion—this is where I’m cautiously adding
information where it’s lacking, since they didn't want to give the information to me—in my
opinion, you have to take into account... I can't say that A Z E R T is with relation… There are
tons of relations, what are the relations this time? These are not random relations. I think there
are two things to consider if you want to understand the keyboard of a typewriter. It is necessary
to take relations of frequency or attraction into account—which comes down to the same thing—
relations of frequency in groups of letters, or attraction of one letter in relation to the others. On
this point, linguists have carried out very detailed studies for each language on the power of
attraction of one letter on the others and on the frequencies of a particular group of letters within
a language. For example, WH has a high frequency in English. The frequency in French is zero.
[Pause; Deleuze hums] Hmmm. G, the letter G in French: what does it attract? It attracts U and
N with a relatively high frequency. It doesn't matter if all that’s true or false, yeah. Alright.

The letters will be spread over the keyboard. The typist is supposed to achieve the ideal, i.e., to
type with both hands. Notice that it's already a vector field, huh? The keyboard has two sides.
The keyboard is vectorized. It is vectorized into two sides—at a fluid border, but a left side and a
right side. What does that mean? It already means that if you have a letter—BTW, I’m
presupposing all of this—if you have a letter, if you have, for example, two high frequency
letters, let's say (and grant me this even if it's not this and is something else) G and U. So, when
you type a G, there is a considerable chance or a large number of cases where the letter will be
followed by a U. It is obvious that it is a good idea to distribute the G and U across both sides.
[Pause] Because, if you put, for example—look at our keyboard—if you put the G here and the
U just below it on the same side, you would have to hit G and U with the same finger, which
would be a huge waste of time. Thus, there are factors: time, the relationship between both
hands, finger spacing and frequency relations specific to a language between letters that will
determine your emission of singularities, which constitute the keyboard. Allow me to call this,
this set (hand relations, finger relations between each hand, frequency relations, and relations of
attraction of letters), force relations between letters and fingers. [Pause] Relations of frequency

                                                                                                      12

of letters and dynamic relations of fingers. I would say: this is what governs the emission of
singularities on a keyboard. That's what Pigier should have said to me. Alright.

On this point, Foucault says that the statement is a regularity. That is to say: as soon as—if only
fictitiously, and it can be completely fictitious—as soon as I make a curve pass through an
integral that goes from the neighborhood of one singularity to another, even if it follows the
same order as the keyboard, even if I seem to copy down AZERT, I create a statement since I
have embodied the singularities in an integral. Why isn’t the first AZERT a statement, while the
second AZERT is? It’s because the first AZERT envisages the pure emission of singularities in a
vector field defined by force relations, while the second AZERT embodies these same
singularities in integrals, even if the integrals only happen to be fictional. [Pause] I integrated the
force relations, and thus constructed a statement. [Pause] If you understand that, then everything
is in place. Now, the transition from knowledge to power. And what will Foucault call “power”?
What he will call “power” — and it is time to say it once and for all... no, we’ll repeat it — what
he will call “power” is any force relation, no matter what it is, except he does not use the term
“force relation” for just anything.

What is a force relation for Foucault? That's very important. But one letter has power over
another, and if you don't understand that, then you won't understand anything about Foucault's
political philosophy. Either a letter has power over another letter, or it doesn't…a letter will have
a power of attraction over another letter. G, assuming that G commands U quite frequently, or N;
in English, let’s assume that W commands H quite frequently, you will say: W has a power of
attraction. Good. All force relations are power, and power alone consists of force relations.
Between two terms there are force relations, and you can say: one exercises power over the other
or both of them exercise power over each other.

How do we get from knowledge to power? We have our answer, at least. We move from
knowledge to power insofar as the statement forms knowledge, is an integral, operates the
integration of singularities, and it is only at the end that we realize that these singularities as such
maintained power relations and force relations amongst one another. In other words, knowledge
is the integration of force relations, in the most general sense, which is force relations between
things, between people, between letters, between light, between shadow and light, between
everything you can think of. This is why Foucault will be able to create a political ontology.
[Pause]

I would say that we are now able to distinguish between force relations that constitute power and
the relations of form that constitute knowledge. Relations of form are the appearance of integral
curves that actualize, and what do they actualize? They actualize singularities, the singularities
that sustain force relations between them. [Pause] Hence the claim from before becomes
particularly urgent: an example from something other than mathematics or linguistics, and notice
that we have given another one, a linguistic example with AZERT, where we see that letters
exercise… [A brief jump on the tape] The statement varies in force relations that the statement
will regularize.

Are you alright? It's, it’s… this thought seems really extraordinary to me. Right now, if you
want, it's…if I were asked…oh there are so many utterly novel things in Foucault, but this is one

                                                                                                   13

of the most remarkably novel points is this analysis, and it seems to me that this analysis is very
extraordinary. Then why…? Yeah, fine…Well, you get some rest…What time is it? 11:00…
[Interruption of the recording] [1:18:32]

… So, someone just made a very fair remark. He says this is all well and good, but if we already
introduce the vector field at the level of singularities; in other words, if we already take
singularities to be force relations, then it's almost the same thing as taking them at the level of
integral curves that pass through a neighborhood. It's not untrue, it's very…the embodiment is
very… it doesn’t prevent force relations… it’s not yet the appearance of curves that pass through
a neighborhood. But there is a kind of intertwining of the two. But the appearance of curves
won’t be defined by force relations. Moreover, you can see that when I invoked relations of
frequency between letters in a given language, for instance, or relations of attraction between one
letter and another, it was a question of any relations whatever, independent of a given integral
curve.

But that doesn't mean there's not a kind of… exactly as we saw between the visible and the
statable. If you will, everything that has been said throughout this term about the two forms of
knowledge, that is, the perpetual interweaving of the visible and the statable, which although
they differ in nature, one does not cease to arouse the other, to capture the other. Foucault will
say exactly the same thing about power and knowledge. Here too, there will be a mutual
presupposition of the two, but a relation of forces is not a relation of forms. For the very simple
reason that a relation of forces—we’ll see this after the new year—is fundamentally non-formal.
While integral curves always define forms. But ultimately, we will only be able to see this very
gradually.

So, the main thing is that you intuit…I always do, I always appeal to your intuition because this
is all new material…if it wasn't new, I mean… and there's a mode of philosophical intuition
without which you wouldn’t understand... [Interruption of the recording] [1:21:15]

Part 3

… of pseudo-mathematics. Although, I think that when it comes to philosophy, the fact that
mathematics includes a mathematical theory of singularities in its most important chapters is one
of the great intersections between mathematics and philosophy. And this has always been the
case. To me, it seems impossible to understand a philosopher like Leibniz without taking into
account the dual affiliation of philosophy and mathematics in the notion of singularity and
singular points. You see, every philosophical theory that reacted against the universal could only
do so in the name of singularities, and singularities already understood in the mathematical
sense, and we will see why it’s so important to Foucault to carry out a criticism of the universal
as far as possible. Very good, well, well, well…So, yeah, there you go.

There are going to be all kinds of practical problems, because, you see, the method—The
Archaeology of Knowledge is a book about method—so if I summarize it by saying: well, yes,
it's about constructing integrals, integral curves in the neighborhoods of singularities, then I think
you’ll understand that I’m not claiming that Foucault is doing mathematics. Because he will

                                                                                                    14

directly apply this method to all other domains. And he’ll have the right to do so, since he will
have revealed the conditions under which this method is not limited to mathematics.

So, let's take an example. What kind of example? A social example this time, an example from
the social field, because I made it clear that there is no reason to keep force relations confined; to
repeat, there are force relations between the letters of the alphabet. Well, let's take an example
from the social field this time. Are there any singularities in the social field? Obviously, there are
singularities in the social field. What are singularities in the social field? Are there any
singularities in the aesthetic field? Yes, there are… there are plenty of them in the aesthetic field.
After all, isn't that the definition of thinking? To think is to emit singularities. If that were a
definition of thought then we would understand [Stéphane] Mallarmé’s “A Throw of the Dice”
better, we would understand Nietzsche's call to play dice. To think is to roll the dice.7

What are singularities? These are dots on the face of the die. The face that results from a dice
throw. So, does that mean we can think anything? Nothing at all. In fact, it means that we can't
think just anything at all, since the singularities I emit must form beautiful integral curves that I
don't know in advance…there are always risks. Take a stupid thought… a moronic thought
[Laughter], I roll the dice, but nothing comes out. It’s a bad toss. I would say... thinking is
throwing the dice, which once again means that, yes, chance itself is a force relation, a force
relation between the dots on the faces of the dice and what comes out of them? Well, maybe the
integrals of philosophy are concepts, but a concept is not a universal; it's an integral of
singularities. Then there would be noetic singularities, singularities of thought? Yes, there would
be noetic singularities, and to do philosophy would be to throw the dice. Alright, good. So, there
will be a philosophical field with singularities. And that's what I'd use to create concepts. Or else
I wouldn't create anything at all. Good.

But, so, let's get back to the social field. There, I'm throwing something, I'm making a little
constellation. So, of course, I am forced to appear to contradict myself, but it’s only pretense.
Because I'm going to name these singularities, otherwise we wouldn't understand anything. I am
forced to name them, so I am already prejudging the integrals that will unite them. But you can
correct it on your own. I'm going to make a little constellation…Oh, no. See, that's how I do it.
I’m throwing…I’m emitting a singularity. I call it “confession”. I’ll say: it's a point of
confession. There you go, it’s a singularity, a point of confession. [Pause] I’m emitting another
one, there, a little higher up…a point of sacrament. [Pause] Down below, I emit a third, a point
of guilt. [Pause] On the left, on the right, I’m emitting one last one, I can't take it anymore: a
point of memorization. There, that makes four, five. I can define force relations. I can define
force relations between these points in a vector field. A first one: my point of confession is
typically taken in a priest-user/confessor-confessed force relation. It's a force relation in the
broadest sense: it doesn't mean the confessor slaps my face, does it? We already saw that that’s
not what a force relation is. Notably, lines of attraction are force relations. Attractions are
typically exercises of force. Sacrament… well, all that… Sacrament, guilt, memorization…

You see that I can make a curve pass through the neighborhood of all these points. I'm doing it
hypothetically. I tell myself: oh, well, yes, there's still something to see. What does the curve tell
me? The integral will pass through the neighborhood of each of these points. Well, that’s how I
start from the “point of confession” and then draw a line to the “point of sacrament”. In fact, I

                                                                                                      15

will have had to confess for communion, to receive communion. It's more like the force relation
of each point in the vector field, an integral curve that goes from the neighborhood of the first
point to the neighborhood of the second.

Sacrament and confession: I can set up two regular lines that reach towards guilt. The sacrament
is a way of redeeming primordial guilt. Confession is the declaration of secondary guilt. Well,
again, if what I say is wrong, you correct it on your own, it doesn't change anything.
Memorization: the examination of conscience that precedes confession. Well, I can push my
integral, my line that I’m calling the “integration” or “actualization” of singular points. How far
can I… how far can I push it? How far? It is extremely variable.

Here’s the first case: I push it until I’m able to call it a special curve, that's right, which would set
the end of the series. I would say: a series ends if I can assign what mathematicians call an
“envelope” (these are very convenient words) among and around the set of integral curves that
actualize the series. Let's put it this way: it’s a curve that envelops all the others. An envelope: all
of these terms are pretty… it's very pretty, an envelope of singularities. That's good. And,
simply, does such an envelope take place? There are cases where there is no envelope. It's like
mathematics, I guess. There are cases where there is no envelope. There are cases where there
are. At the end of his life Foucault became more and more interested in what he called “pastoral
power”. And I think the unpublished book, Confessions of the Flesh, analyzes the formation of
this particular church power, pastoral power.

Pastoral power is an ancient idea that can be found in Plato, namely: grazing as the model of
government. Grazing a flock is the whole theme of Plato's Statesman…What is a good ruler?
He's the pastor of a herd. It may seem like nothing, but it is a fundamental political problem: is
power pastoral? It goes without saying that Christianity takes advantage of the idea of pastoral
power in its revival of Platonism with the Fathers of the Church and alters it in ways that
obviously differ greatly from Plato, since they are Christian ways. And pastoral power becomes,
above all, a new type of power that state power did not fulfil at that time, which, perhaps,
prefigures the future State. It could be defined in the following way (how would the force
relation of pastoral power arise)? Control of everyday life.

Control of everyday life. Management of everyday life. The pastor of the herd…the human
multiplicity, the human community is likened to a herd such that the pastor must take charge of
the everyday details of existence for each member of the herd. This is a type of power that has no
equivalent. Pastoral power is completely different from royal power. The king does not care at
all about the everyday life of his subjects. The pastor takes care of the everyday life of his herd
and what takes place in the mind of the herd. The king doesn't give a damn what's going on in
people's heads. Well, I would say: here, the pastoral schema is encompassing, it’s an envelope.
[Pause]

Can I say: the series ends, therefore, it is closed by the pastoral schema? Yes, yes, from a certain
point of view. Can't it be extended? From a certain moment in history, it’s likely that Foucault
would situate the transition of the pastoral power of the Church to State power, which retains the
model of pastoral power, at the end of the 18th century and the beginning of the 19th century.
Specifically, one of the fundamental claims of the church's power is to individualize those to

                                                                                                        16

whom it relates, to individualize its subjects, and, by the same token, to be able to control them
in their everyday lives, and the State also makes this its objective through completely different
means. There is, therefore, a kind of relay where pastoral power is taken over by State power,
even if it entails very important changes. State power demands, or positions itself to demand, the
individualization of its subjects. Good. At that moment, I can say that under this condition my
series extends beyond pastoral power. There will be convergence between the pastoralized series
and the state series. Between the Church series and the State series. Alright. We’ll settle for that.

What does that mean? What would the method for analysis of the social field be? The method of
analysis of the social field is: to fix the singularities that are present in this field as they enter into
force relations that constitute the vector field. So: to fix the constitutive singularities of such and
such a social field, i.e., those that enter into force relations that correspond to this social field.
The second point is to construct the institutional forms, i.e., the integral curves that actualize
these force relations. The sacrament, the confessional, the power of the Church as an
institution… well. Insofar as force relations and singularities are actualized, are considered to be
actualized in these integral curves and in these institutions, they constitute real kinds of
knowledge. [Pause] All this knowledge will be developed at the confessional level as casuistry,
at the sacraments level, at the level of the Fathers of the Church, and at the level of what can be
called “pastoral knowledge”, in general. And, to the extent that the force relations of singularities
are embodied in these curves, statements emerge.

We’re discovering our solution again. I am looking for sexual statements in the 19th century. All
we have to do now is start over again, but I think we have already taken a big enough step
forward that everything is much clearer now. I’m looking to construct a corpus of sentences
about sexuality and words that speak about sexuality at this particular period in time. How do I
construct my corpus? I’m looking for singularities as foci of power. Focus is a bad word: there
are centers of power, nodes of power, saddles of power, or whatever you want…they’re
singularities. I assign my singularities, which are foci of power. I'm causing my curves to move.
These curves are forms of statements. They are forms of statements that carry knowledge in
themselves.

Third question: so, you see the two aspects of the serial method. First aspect… I’ll start again:
you assign singularities and force relations according to where they are taken. That's the problem
with power. Second aspect: constructing integral curves, i.e., institutional integrations that
produce statements. That's the aspect: knowledge. I’m building my series. Second aspect. Third
aspect: when does a series end? Variable response. It all depends on the level. Once again, there
is a whole series that ends with pastoral power, but which, from another point of view, converges
with State power. You can cut it off, depending on your goal, you can cut it off at some place
that is closer or further away. Sometimes the duration will be short; since every series is
spatiotemporal, you’ll have some series with short duration, and you can also construct series
with long duration.

Note for the future that this is a problem for Foucault: Foucault has always preferred series of
short duration. If you look at all of his books, except the last ones, you see that he studies periods
of short duration and hates periods of long duration, because he is afraid that they will fall back
into universal history. So, at most, they’re series taken over two centuries. The History of

                                                                                                   17

Madness; even Discipline and Punish is a 50-year series. They’re short series. And we’ll visit
this problem again, except with The Use of Pleasure, where Foucault's conversion to the long
series, to long duration, bursts forth. It's about tracing the history of something that begins with
the Greeks. It is quite unusual for such a long period of time. From the Greeks to us, while
passing through the Fathers of the Church. The History of Sexuality continues from the second
volume of a long duration. What could have happened? If we have to start with something very
specific to understand, we could even ask the question: How did Foucault change between The
Will to Knowledge and The Use of Pleasure? I think that a good way to ask this question,
because it involves concrete detail, would be: what could have converted Foucault toward
dealing with a large series, a long series?

So, this is like the third aspect: when does a series end? And on this point, we can see quite
clearly what Foucault owes to the historians of his time. We can see quite clearly what he owes
to Braudel, since Braudel always dealt with series, constituted historical series and, furthermore,
he distinguished series according to the length of time that they spread out. And Braudel’s entire
conception of history, as you know—perhaps I will speak more precisely about it further along,
later on—is to distinguish between three kinds of duration: short duration, medium duration, and
long duration, which coexist with each other. We will have to ask ourselves what the distribution
of durations is with respect to series in Foucault’s thought. That's a lot of trouble, isn't it?8

So, I gave an example. My example is: related to sexuality, how do the foci of power locate
themselves within singularities, in force relations that will be actualized in processes of
integration, these processes of integration being constitutive of knowledge? Well, that's
Foucault's general theme. I'll take two examples. Two other examples that Foucault summarizes
in The Archaeology of Knowledge, the example of psychiatry (pp. 233-234) [179-180]. He says:
“what made it possible” – psychiatry -- "what made it possible at the time that it appeared, what
brought about this great change in the economy of concepts [analyses and demonstrations], was a
whole set of relations…” -- be careful, you will see that the terms of these relations are not
knowledge -- “…was a whole set of relations between…” -- now I'm starting my emission of
singularities again -- “...between hospitalization [1], internment [2], conditions and procedures of
social exclusion [3]…” -- procedures of exclusion are not the same as internment -- “…the rules
of jurisprudence [4], industrial labor norm [5] […] in short, a whole group of relations that
characterized for this discursive practice the formation of its statements”.9

It can’t be said any better: it is the constellation of power foci, i.e., the constellation of
singularities, which will make it possible to draw the curves that constitute knowledge. Good.
That's exactly… it should be said that the social field emits a roll of the dice. You'll tell me: Oh
well, the social field emits a roll of the dice, but isn’t that starting from scratch? No, it's not
starting from scratch. Undoubtedly, the roll of the dice for each social field is partly determined
by the state of the forces of the previous field. What is it? I say that because we might see that
again later. I’m saying it now for those who were here last year that it’s exactly what is referred
to as a succession of semi-dependent events, or what is referred to as a Markov chain. Successive
re-enchaining. Each time something is drawn at random, but according to the data of the
previous draw. A succession of random draws that partially depend upon one another. Well, that
constitutes a Markov chain. Social mutations can be conceived in the form of a Markov chain.10

                                                                                                   18

It’s the same analysis that Foucault gives of pathological anatomy. Pathological anatomy is a
form of knowledge, it is a kind of knowledge that is constituted and formed in the 19th century,
at the beginning of the 19th century, and at the end of the 18th century, but what was there
before that? Similarly, one can ask: what was there before psychiatry? There was no psychiatry,
there was something else. It was a complete redistribution of the previous field that made
psychiatry possible. A new draw. Before pathological anatomy, what was there? There was the
clinic. The clinic was the conquest of the 18th century. It takes a complete redistribution of
clinical foci for pathological anatomy to be possible as a form of knowledge.

On pages 213-214, he says this, which was demonstrated in much more detail in The Birth of the
Clinic – [Pause] Hmmm, I’m not going to find… [Pause] -- here it is: pathological anatomy will
discover a new field, a new object that will be an object of knowledge, and that is tissue. Tissue
is… tissue is a great discovery for biology, for medicine… Good. Pathological anatomy is
formed around tissue, taking tissue as its object. But “the [preliminary] fields are constituted by
the mass of population under administrative compartmented” -- You will ask: how does this
relate to tissues? Well, yes it does, The Birth of the Clinic clearly shows what the relationship is
between the discovery of tissues and this kind of data -- “…the mass of population
administratively compartmented and supervised, gauged according to certain norms of life and
health” -- you see, those are all power relations -- “…analyzed according to documentary and
statistical forms of registration; they are also constituted by the great conscript armies of the
revolutionary and Napoleonic period […]; they are also constituted by the institutions of hospital
assistance that were defined at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th centuries...” etc.,
etc.11

You can see that Foucault proceeds each time by making his constellation of singularities,
questioning the force relations that vectorize these singularities, and then constructs these series
that are constitutive of knowledge.

Good. I can summarize in very broad terms by saying… except, if you followed me, we’ve only
done half. We’ve only done half, because: what did I just demonstrate? Well, yes, curves—now I
can say curve-statement with a hyphen, so I would say: any statement is a curve-statement—and
I would say: curve-statements actualize the force relations or power relations between
singularities. Actualize, embody, etc. We don't know what word to use yet, we'll only figure that
out later. Yeah. Are you alright?

But, I’m saying, I've only done half of our task. Only we’re so tired that the other half is going to
go fast. Because, as you recall, [Pause] knowledge has two irreducible forms. The production of
statements and production of light. Knowledge is light no less than language is. Knowledge
intertwines light and language and much more, and we wondered how it could do so since the
light-form and the language-form have nothing to do with each other and are irreducible. We
arrived at this cruel problem, since, last time, everything brought us back to this: if you stay in
the dimension of knowledge, you will never understand how the two forms can be intertwined.
But you can see that we have the solution. We have everything we need now. That's good. But,
at one point, we were too tired to be happy about it, as always. [Laughter] On the other hand, I
can't move on without saying the same thing.

                                                                                                      19

On the other hand, it is also necessary that, on their behalf, luminosities integrate singular points
that are taken up in power relations, in force relations. In other words: just as statements are
curves, visibilities are tables. And yet, there is something that is bothering me, which is that
Foucault uses the word “table”, which he uses so often in a much more general sense than suits
both curves and visibilities. It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter. If we try to reserve a particular
meaning for the word “table”, then we will have to say: well, yes, visibilities integrate singular
points into tables and not into curve-statements. Into visibility-tables. Visibilities are tables no
less than… That's why visibilities are never things. As we saw last time, for Foucault,
particularly with regard to Raymond Roussel, visibility is the label on the Evian water bottle, the
letterhead of a grand hotel. Visibility is always a picture. Why? Because visibility is a being of
light before it is a solid being.

Well, light, just like the statement, is an integration of singularities, singular points. And you can
only define a light…and the path of a light as going from one singularity to another; that is, there
are luminous series just as there are verbal series. I want to comment more on this point, but we
can't take it anymore. On this subject, I’ll point you toward two kinds of text. The famous
description of [Diego] Velázquez's painting, Las Meninas, which I’ll ask you to read from the
following point of view—I am not saying that this is the only point of view to read this text, it is
one possible point of view—from the following point of view: how do Velázquez’s lines of light
unite and pass through neighborhoods of singularities? What will the singularities of Velázquez’s
painting be? You will see that they are not reduced, they are multiple, they follow the very path
of light, the way in which the path of light curves, has vertices, i.e., passes through singularities
that distribute reflections, brightness, etc. And everything culminates in the force relations
between two masterly singularities, two dominant singularities: the painter and his model, the
king. I'm not saying that everything can be reduced to this; on the contrary, there is a whole
development of an extremely varied pictorial field populated by singularities, but certain
singularities are dominant.

The two dominant ones are: the painter and his model, the painter's gaze that sees without us
seeing what he sees, and the king's gaze that sees without being seen. I would say that it is the
relationship between these two singularities, the force relations, of the painter and the king. We
can ask the question: which of these two forces is stronger? The strength of the painter or the
strength of the king. It all depends on the point of view. In any case, that's what will mark the
closing of the painting. This will be the envelope of the painting: the standoff between the
painter and the king, but this standoff passes through the distribution of the baby, the dog, the
jester, etc., etc. And you have the light of the painting which is the integration of all these
singularities in a mode, in a certain mode that is Velasquez's mode. You can conceive of other
modes. If you refer to the book on Raymond Roussel, around page 150, before and after page
150, as we saw when I commented on it last time, there’s a great passage where Foucault
analyzes visibilities in Roussel. Here, you have a visibility regime of a completely different type
than Velasquez’s, which this time proceeds bit by bit.

While describing the bottle of mineral water, the label of the mineral water bottle, Roussel
proceeds in a kind of local construction that gradually spreads, where he is constantly saying: on
the right we see this, a little in the background we see that, etc. just as Foucault says, it’s as if we
were moving from one niche to another niche, as if we were slipping into a succession of tiny

                                                                                                      20

rooms, and this succession of tiny rooms will constitute the path of light, a whole other regime of
light. If you wanted to do practical exercises related to what we're doing here…maybe we'll do it
later, you'll take painting regimes and you'll wonder how they are different regimes of light and
what kind of singularities they include, what kind of force relations these regimes of light have.

Because, after all, there are force relations, just like I said earlier, and you know there are force
relations between the letters of the alphabet. In this sense, we can talk about a politics of
language: yes, from the level where there are force relations between the letters of the alphabet.
There are also force relations between colors. Force relations between colors…it is even…force
relations between colors…colors…you can conceive of them as singularities united by force
relations in a vector field. And, if you consider any kind of color scheme, you cannot define
things like cold and hot, for example in terms of color, without using forces. If there is anyone
who has shown this definitively, it is [Wassily] Kandinsky, who is only able to present colors
according to the forces affected by each one, as the forces affected by each one already
determine the relationship between two colors, and the painting will be the integration of this and
that force relation between colors. This is why Kandinsky's paintings are poorly referred to as
being “abstract”.

So. I can say that…well…we have our solution. You’ll recall our solution: but how can the two
forms be intertwined? How can the two forms of knowledge, the visible and the enunciable,
intertwine when they have nothing in common? Our answer was: well, they can only be
intertwined in an instance that arises from another dimension. Now we have it. We have it, the
instance that is in another dimension and that explains the intertwining of the two forms of
knowledge is: the distribution of singularities and force relations between singularities, which I
would call a non-formal dimension, the non-formal dimension of force relations as opposed to
the dimension formed by form relations, by form relations. However, we can only finish if we
understand what it means to say “force relations are non-formal.” We still have a lot to do,
because how “force relations are non-formal” is a mystery.

But above all, you can see that when Foucault uses the term “force relations”, he never, ever
means “exercise of violence.” So, what does it mean, since the force relation is non-formal and
does not consist of violence, that is, in the destruction of form? This will be our object of study
when we return next term. All I can say in conclusion is that it's very simple.

What is in common or what is, undoubtedly, the deepest point in common between Foucault and
[Maurice] Blanchot? I would say the deepest point in common is to have established, in two very
different ways, a set of intimate connections between the following three notions: the neutral or
the “one”, as one part; the singular, as another; and the multiple, as yet another. The neutral, or
“one”, is opposed to the person. [Pause] The singular is opposed to the universal. The multiple is
opposed to one and the same. The three notions are strictly… [Interruption of the recording]
[2:07:48]

Part 4

…are emitted. It is the form of the distribution of singularities. [Pause] When I said: to think is
to emit a throw of the dice, well, the throw of the dice is always emitted into a “one”. “One”

                                                                                                                    21

thinks. On the side of the singular, the singular is not opposed to the “one”, since it is prepersonal, it has nothing to do with a person. Moreover, it would not be difficult to show that a
singularity is already a force relation. In other words, the real subject is force. And that's where
Foucault ends up being Nietzschean. And the only misinterpretation to translate is: there is
violence everywhere. That is so little of Foucault's thought. Foucault absolutely separated force
relations from the effects of violence. We'll see why.

Finally, the singular is not opposed to the multiple. We will call a “multiplicity” a constellation
of singularities in the “one”. A distribution of singularities in the “one” is precisely what a
multiplicity is. I think that Foucault assigned very precise relations and status to these three terms
around which Blanchot revolved as the three components of his thought, which was not
Blanchot's objective.

So, we have our answer, once again: what is this other dimension that is the only one capable of
ensuring the intertwining of the two irreducible forms of knowledge? It is force relations or
power. They are the ones that are embodied in the visibility-table, as they are embodied in curvestatements. It is, therefore, in the non-formal elements of the force relation and singularity that
the two forms of knowledge can find a reason for their intertwining. Hence the need to move
beyond knowledge towards power, even though knowledge and power are inseparable from each
other, such that Foucault speaks about an inseparable complex of the power-knowledge system.
What could possibly happen so that at the end of his life he would still discover a third
dimension and why did he need it? That will be our guiding question. There you go, have a good
holiday, get some rest. [End of the recording] [2:11:15]

Notes

  Despite the emphasis that Deleuze places on this example from Foucault, Deleuze refers to it in Foucault only
briefly, pp. 78-79. However, he introduces this example in the opening chapter, “A New Archivist”, p. 2, and returns
to it precisely in the context discussed here on pp. 11-12. He also refers in passing to the example in the chapter on
subjectification, p. 98.
 The page numbers are to the French edition of L’Archéologie du savoir (Paris: Gallimard, 1969), with English
edition references in brackets, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Harbert & Row, 1972).
 On these rules, see Foucault, p. 147, note 18; in a note from the first chapter, “The New Archivist”, Deleuze cites
Labov’s work in Sociolinguistic Patterns (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1972).
 In L’Ordre du discours, the French text reads “le mouvement d’un logos qui élève les singularités jusqu’au
concept" (Paris : Gallimard, 1971), p. 20, hence the English translation would be “a logos that elevates singularities
all the way to the concept”. We follow the translation of this passage, p. 228, in the text, “The Discourse on
Language” published as an appendix to The Archeology of Knowledge (cited above, pp. 215-237), translation by
Rupert Sawyer.
 In fact, the title of this early text by Poincaré is Sur les propriétés des fonctions définies par les équations aux
différences partielles (1879) [On the properties of functions defined through equations with partial differences]. As
for Lautman’s book, the full title in French is Symmétrie et dissymétrie en Mathématiques et en Physique: Le proble
du temps (Paris : Hermann, 1946) that Deleuze cites partially in Foucault, p. 143, note 13.
    This was a well-known commerce school.

                                                                                                                  22

 This is a reference to Mallarmé’s poem, “Un coup de dés n’abolira jamais le hasard" (1897) [A toss of the dice will
never abolish chance”] On this aesthetic analysis and references to Proust, Velasquez, Magritte, and Roussel, see
Foucault, pp. 79-81.
  On Braudel and the types of duration, see Foucault, p. 148, note 31, where Deleuze refers to Braudel’s Écrits sur
l’histoire (Paris: Flammarion 1977).
    L’Archéologie du savoir, p. 233; The Archeology of Knowledge, p. 179.
  On these chains as they relate to discontinuities and mutations, see Foucault, p. 86, and also Chance, see
Foucault, p. 117.
     L’Archéologie du savoir, p. 214; The Archeology of Knowledge, pp. 163-164.