1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Leibniz and the Baroque – Principles and Freedom

Lecture 19, 26 May 1987: Principles and Freedom (14) -- Review of the Two Floors, and the
Rapport of Harmony

Initial Transcription by Web Deleuze; Augmented Transcription and Translation by
Charles J. Stivale (duration, 2:01:30)1

Part 1

So, listen up, if you hear me. As I told you the last time, we have two sessions, and I ask you to
forgive me for presenting them to you so quickly. And then, and then, for a thousand reasons, I
can no long continue. So, [we have] today and next week, after which our work for this year is
over. The other Tuesdays, I will come solely to take care of students in the premier cycle,
deuxième cycle, troisième cycle for the assignments that some among you need to submit to me.2
So I will set up meetings at the usual hours, or rather, a bit later, say, around ten o’clock. So, this
will be of interest only for those who have some kinds of relationship with the university
program, to take care of all the details. If there are any situations that we need to deal with
immediately, because I received a memo saying that this is your business to be informed, all that,
but the memo says some of you need certificates in advance. So I will come solely for that. If by
some bad luck I weren’t able to come, then those who need to see me for signatures, etc., or
administrative details, I ask you to please phone me, but without taking advantage of this. My
number is in the phone book. So there we are. What remains is today and the next time, and it’s
quite simple.

It’s a bit as if this course on Leibniz, by moving forward a little and then especially often by
moving back, had developed like a research project that should have lasted two years, such that
what I am doing now is much more [than] what would have been the material for another year.
And since we have today and next week, I am trying to make things as clear as possible today,
and I want to propose to you a series, how to say, of pathways concerning the two floors since it
was our departure point. This is a philosophy of two floors, a kind of visit of the two floors, or if
you prefer, a collection, almost of musings (rêveries) -- I would really like for you to intervene if
there is a point that… [Deleuze does not complete this sentence] -- some musings about this
organization of Leibniz’s philosophy, and notably about the role played by the living (le vivant)
or the organic. And that should take us into the respective rapports of the two floors –
summarily, rapports of souls and bodies – so we will have seen in the meantime that it’s not the
rapports of souls and bodies. That is why I say “musings” because each time that I pronounce a
sentence, you have to wait for the moment to correct it, or for you to correct it yourself. It’s not
my fault; it’s Leibniz’s style.

And so we must get to these two floors: do they have a common law? What are their rapports?
And we sense this rapport already: it’s what Leibniz will call the rapport of harmony, harmony
of souls among themselves, harmony of bodies among themselves, harmony of souls with

                                                                                                        2

bodies. And where we wanted to end from the very start is precisely with this point, this concept
of harmony, that’s become fundamental for philosophy: what is its relation with what is taking
place at about the same period in music? [Pause]

For example, someone gave me a little book by Rameau in which I read “the expression of
outward appearance (du physique) is in the measure and the movement.” If I read most stupidly,
through association of ideas, I tell myself that this perhaps refers to the music that came before.
The expression of outward appearance is in the measure and in the movement: we already know
that, in Leibniz, -- although on this point, I haven’t been far off – we know already that in
Leibniz, it’s not movement that matters, but it’s a reason of the movement that he will call force.
I continue: “The expression of outward appearance is in the measure and in the movement. The
expression of the pathetic, on the contrary …” Is it with Leibniz that the pathetic arrives? Yes
indeed. Here, I am editing, but no matter, we’re musing.

Ah yes, pathos arrives. Why? Because he will tell us that beyond movement, there is something
else. And beyond movement, what is it? It is alteration, variation, pathos. "The expression of
outward appearance is in the measure and the movement”; we can now read almost, “the
expression of outward appearance of music of the past is in the measure and the movement; the
expression of the pathetic, on the contrary, is in harmony and inflections." Perhaps you
remember [that] this was one of our first words this year, when it was a question of defining
Leibniz’s philosophy, saying: let’s start from inflections. “[The expression] of the pathetic, on
the contrary, is in harmony and inflections, that one must weigh before deciding about what must
determine one’s preference (emporter la balance).” What does this mean? Rameau tells us:
Reflect well, musicians, about which determines one’s preference: either measure and movement
that constitute outward appearance, the musical constitution, or the pathetic that resides in
harmony and inflections.

And if one agrees with the idea that, almost at the same period, harmony in music undergoes a
very important mutation, [Pause] which already will concern Montiverdi and will fundamentally
concern Bach, can’t one also think that, when Leibniz presents what he gives us as one of its
fundamental concepts – pre-established harmony, and his opposing Descartes and the Cartesians
with pre-established harmony and, at the same time, reproaching Descartes and the Cartesians
for have settled only on movement and, in doing so, to have understood nothing about the nature
of movement – can’t one tell oneself: yes, we’ve got something here, we’ve got something here?
We might be shocked that the confrontation between Leibniz and music has not yet sufficiently
occurred. [Pause]

So let’s try to construct these floors, this history, the two Baroque floors. You recall, we had
mentioned this: what is fundamental is a line in inflections. Why is that so fundamental? I am not
starting over; I assume you have it in mind somewhat. Why is this… This is a line that is not
straight line, but that presents singularities, intrinsic singularities, you recall, a line that
represents, let’s call it abstract representation of a line that presents intrinsic singularities: this is
a line in inflections.3 We saw it, for example, in Paul Klee’s work from the start. We had said:
that’s it, you know, the Baroque line. [Pause] But, concretely, what does that mean? Concretely,
that means: Pause] what matters, and almost the unity of the world, is the event. The event is an

                                                                                                        3

inflection. Inflection is the abstract figure of the event: the event is the concrete case of
inflection. [Pause]

And what is the world? It’s an aggregate, an infinite succession of inflections or events that will
be named: states of the world. To which you will tell me, perhaps: it’s like a curious way of
defining and beginning to present a floor that you already expected – by virtue of our past – in
what would be the floor of souls, and then of invoking events and inflections. This is because
already everything is mixed together. Socrates sits in his prison. You see, Socrates sits in his
prison, that’s a reference to a famous text by Plato. Why is Socrates seated in prison awaiting
death? And Plato asks: does he have knees that could fold? [Laughter] Ok yes, he has knees that
could fold. That doesn’t prevent that it’s not due to him having knees that could fold that he’s
sitting in prison. He is sitting in prison because he is quite fine with that. What is so fine? He
finds that it is quite fine not to try to escape. He awaits his condemnation. What does that mean?
Understand: every act must be connected to two things at once: efficient causes, Plato will
already say -- but also Leibniz, and he will say it with more force -- and final causes. Socrates is
seated in prison because he finds that fine: a final cause. Good.

I mean something very simple: every event is an event of the spirit, and I mean nothing else. Or
if you prefer, it goes without saying that every event concerns bodies, and no doubt I couldn’t
cite a single event that doesn’t concern bodies, but I only say: that aspect, we leave it aside for
the moment. It’s understood that we cannot say everything at once, so the aspect through which
the event concerns bodies, we won’t get involved with that at the moment because there is
another aspect of the event. If you tell me: but isn’t that a duality? No, it’s not a duality, one is
strictly in the other – but in what manner? What relation is there between the two aspects? The
event is indeed in bodies, but it is not only in bodies.

So fine, that clarifies a little bit. That answers the objection that I posed to myself: how do you
say… I am going to talk to you about the spirit, and then begin with an event like being seated in
his prison. And we saw how Leibniz moved forward in this discovery of the spirit. It’s that the
line in inflections, or the line in events, is enveloped in a spiritual unity that will be called
monad. We go from inflection to envelopment. I won’t go back over that. As result, if it is true
that every inflection is a singularity, an intrinsic singularity, we have to say that a monad is a
condensation of singularities, or that, if you prefer, a monad expresses the world. [Pause]

In what sense does it express the world? Events are its predicates. And we have seen the extent
to which it could be ruinous for an understanding of Leibniz’s philosophy to think that predicates
were attributes, attributes of judgment, whereas predicates were events as expressed by
propositions. The type of proposition in Leibniz is not “the sky is blue”; it’s “Caesar crosses the
Rubicon”. Understand why I insist so much on that: if we don’t have that, if we don’t grasp that
in a very lively manner, then we understand strictly nothing of what Leibniz means. And if we
linked Leibniz so strongly to Whitehead, it’s for this reason: these are philosophers of the event
for whom, in the end, everything is event, and in that very way, everything is a predicate of
subjects, of individual unities that express the world. [Pause]

So, this is a first step that allows me to say at once, if you recall, well yes, you understand, that
allows me to say, at once, we have to say at once each individual substance, each monad, each

                                                                                                         4

soul or spirit – all that, let’s take these as identical – each individual substance, each soul or
spirit, each monad expresses the totality of the world. [Pause] And we have to say at once that
monads are for this world that they express – if the world had been different, the monads would
have been different since they would have expressed another world. So, we must say at once that
monads are for the world that they express, but that this world does not exist outside the monads
that express it. So as a result, what is the world? It is the common expressed (exprimé) of all the
monads that God has caused to come into existence. He could have caused other monads to come
into existence, fine, but at that point, this would have been another world. He would have chosen
another world, and we have seen this strange notion of world’s choice for Leibniz.

Let us take yet another step forward in examining this [upper] floor – you see [that] we are
therefore on the floor, on a very odd floor, but I have insisted at least on us having completed
this point from where we began: that the world is expressed by each monad, yes, and as the
world does not exist outside the monads that express it, one has to say that each monad has an
infinity of folds, the world is folded into each monad. And this theme of folding already
appeared on the level of the spirit. But immediately the problem returned: good, so why not a
single monad? Why [are there] so many monads? Why is there an infinity of monads that express
the same world? The answer that Leibniz gave us is, why isn’t there a single world, a single God,
a single… Why was Spinoza wrong, according to Leibniz? Leibniz’s answer is that there is
indeed an individual reason, a principle of individuation of monads, specifically that they all
express the same infinite world, to infinity, but they only express clearly a tiny portion of the
world. Each of us only expresses clearly a tiny portion of the world.

As a result, from the start, you see, this floor of souls, independently of the body – that is what
matters to Leibniz, that darkness does not come from the body. It’s the soul, once again, it’s the
soul that is dark, it’s the soul that is obscure. It only has a tiny region of clarity. Its tiny region of
clarity is the privileged portion that it especially expresses. It especially expresses a privileged
notion: you, me, someone who lived a thousand years ago. We don’t express the same region of
the world, as he says so well, once again: each has one’s own subdivision, about which we say –
and I won’t go back over this – the extent to which it could be reduced or extended, the extent to
which, for example, in the damned, it would be reduced to a nothing, and on the other hand, for
the man of progress, it was going to extend. But finally, all of this is the notions that cause us to
visit this floor of the souls.

A woman student (seated near Deleuze, whispering): [Inaudible]

Deleuze: What?

The student: [Inaudible, she tells him that there is someone with a question]

Deleuze: Yes, yes, do stop me, indeed stop me. This is like a visit; it’s as if I told you, there we
have an apartment with two floors. So if you ask me: ah, ok, what is that good for? We can do a
bit of administration (gestion). Go ahead.

                                                                                                       5

Another woman student: There’s a little something bothering me: is it only because all monads
are in contact with each other that we can deduce that the world does not exist outside of these
monads?

Deleuze: No, for that would be contradictory. If I was saying monads have strictly nothing to do
with each other because they are in contact, that wouldn’t work because this contact
[Interruption of the BNF & YouTube recording; text from Web Deleuze] [23:09] would form just
a bit of something in common, a common world. What happens is that monad, we cannot even
say…, Leibniz says in a text: we cannot say that they are far off or distant, they have neither
doors nor windows. [Return to the BNF & YouTube recording; 23:10] They are entirely closed in
on themselves, they are closed off.

Part 2

The same student: But still, you once spoke about a rapport that they all had there, even if they
are without doors or windows. Because with all this rapport, this seems to me… No, because it’s
still something strange to say that monads are for the world that they express, but this world does
not exist outside these monads.

Deleuze: That’s it, that’s the essential point. This is essential. I mean, in fact, the question is very
good because if you lose one of the two aspects, you are done for. I mean, we must at all costs
maintain the two aspects. To say, we have to say… Of course, the world does not exist outside
the monads. How would it exist? It does not exist outside monads for a very simple reason which
is: every predicate is in the subject. We saw this long analysis; or if you prefer, all that gives rise
to an inflection is folded into the monad, so there is no world that would not be folded into this
kind of envelope: the monad, you or me.

You know, I am thinking of something completely different in saying this. I am thinking of a
famous text by Proust about how a world can be folded into a character, into a person. This is the
case [here]: for Leibniz, the world is perpetually folded into individual unities. Why? So, we are
asking, why? So, if we answer, this is because, if you understand well that the event is always an
inflection, [Pause] well then, the inflection no longer exists except as “enveloped in”. – [Deleuze
talks quietly to the woman student near him who wants to reply] So, excuse me, I’m not going to
start all over. I am just completing this so that you can then speak. -- So I can say: the world
exists only in the monads that express it; but I also have to say: monads exist only for the world
that they express. Why? Because Leibniz constantly comes back to this -- a typical example -- :
God did not create Adam the sinner; he created the world in which Adam sinned. He did not
create a particular monad, a particular other world, a particular other monad, because at that
point, they wouldn’t express the same world. He created a world; he could have created another
one. When he caused this world to come into existence, he made it pass into, and by creating, the
infinity of monads that express this world. Otherwise, he can no longer do anything. If he creates
a common world, if he creates a common world in which there would be individuals, subjects,
etc., [Pause] we would be in a situation, fine, but [what of] the other worlds that he could have
created? One has to, if you wish to… [Pause] He has the conception of an infinity of possible
worlds, which are not, as [Leibniz] says, compossible with one another. He chooses one of these
worlds, the one with the most reality, the one with the greatest quantity of reality, as [Leibniz]

                                                                                                     6

says, that is, the most perfect. But this world has no existence in itself independently of
individual substances, since individual substances are the very reality that has no existence
outside the individual substances that express it. I insist on this because if we don’t understand at
this level, I believe that we will understand nothing there.

I am almost getting ahead of something: what does the notion of harmony mean? When Leibniz
uses the word, and I am not talking in musical terms, nor philosophical terms, I am saying, on the
occasion of this question: let’s consider a hypothesis, already for the next session; that will be
useful for the next meeting. Harmony, you understand, there is an enormous number of texts by
Leibniz on harmony. So, we are looking at what they have in common, and I believe that if one
brought together all the texts, since we won’t have the time to do so, one already sees that
harmony is a rather odd rapport between… it’s a rapport that concerns expression. It’s a rapport
of expression, and it is expression as rapport. Indeed, I am saying that would perhaps suit us for
music, because in a certain manner – maybe we will see it next time – it’s with the Baroque that
music calls for an expressive value. [With] the expressive value of music, there you already have
the introduction of the Baroque. This is perhaps a bit what Rameau called “the pathetic”, but we
will see.

I am saying harmony is a rapport of expression, but what is the rapport of expression? Let’s
clarify this; this isn’t going to help us go forward very far. I am calling rapport of expression a
rapport between a term called “expresser” (exprimant) and term named “expressed” (exprimé).
[Pause] Fine, [that makes] no sense unless I define this rapport, I would say, in what time? So, if
expression is a rapport between an expresser and an expressed, what does this rapport consist of?
I propose a hypothesis: it’s double. On one hand, the expressed does not exist outside its
expresser; on the other hand, and at the same time, the expresser is in a regulated correspondence
with its expressed. [Pause] Oh, what joy! I wouldn’t have believed to achieve something so clear
and abstract at the same time. I believe that’s it, that’s what harmony is, and is unsuitable for
anything else: two things are in harmony when they are in the same situation.

I refer, for example, to a text for those who might have considered this, but it’s in Latin, and to
my knowledge, it hasn’t been translated. This is Quid sit idea, “what an idea is”, in the seventh
volume of Oeuvres philosophiques, Quid sit idea, in which Leibniz analyzes the rapport of
expression. I believe that this text, I don’t want to say too much, I can’t say that this [quote] is in
this text, but I am saying that perhaps the text supports this conclusion that I am drawing, this
relation between expresser and expressed. Both of them are necessary, if you will, at the same
time: what I express does not exist outside of me; it’s a strange relation. That’s why I was telling
you: there is torsion, there’s a torsion between expresser and expressed. There is torsion outside
of me. What I am expressing does not exist outside of me, and at the same time, I myself exist
only in a regulated correspondence with what I express.

What is this in mathematics? If suddenly, I dare everything, but you know, it’s not far, it’s not
exactly far from what is called a function. And I don’t know if in mathematics one couldn’t say –
I know who could tell us, but it bothers me to disturb him – if one couldn’t already say
something like that in mathematics, that a function is fundamentally expressive, if there aren’t
both characteristics, if one function is not a rapport between two terms such that one doesn’t
exist independently from the other and the other doesn’t exist independently from a regulated

                                                                                                      7

correspondence with the first. I say at once: the world that God chose does not exist outside
monads that express it. Differently, we have seen that there are no two monads who express the
world in the same way – we saw this, it’s the theory of point of view, and we saw what the
theory of point view consisted of: that each of us has his/her subdivision, his/her tiny portion of
clear expression.4

A student: [Inaudible, except for what Deleuze repeats] Where does this limit come from?

Deleuze: Where does this limit come from? We are finite. Every creature is finite. There is only
one being that does not have this limit, God, who expresses adequately and distinctly not only
the universe that it has chosen, but the infinity of other universes. But our finitude means that we
only express a single world among all the compossible worlds, on one hand, and that we only
express clearly a tiny region of this world. What is this a result of? It’s a result of our finitude,
that is, of the fact that we not only have an expressive force, but that we have – we saw it in a
previous meeting – a primary matter, primary matter meaning: power of finitude (puissance de
finitude).

A woman student (near Deleuze): If all monads are finite, through God the world must
nonetheless be infinite…

Deleuze: Yeah, since there is an infinity of monads.

The student: … that still lets one assume that there is a world that might exist outside the
monads.

Deleuze: Why? [Pause] No, we have to find another word. I believe that it’s… A long time ago,
related entirely to something else, we happened to, I proposed another expression: the world does
not exist outside monads – we have to say that it insists. It does not exist. -- This is really odd. In
this, I was expecting there to be no difficulty, and I am always surprised. -- I am saying: monads
are the existence of the world. I mean, for me -- not for me, for Leibniz. That goes so much
without saying that the world does not exist outside of monads since if one asks, “what is the
existence of the world?”, he says, its monads.

The student: But God is more than the totality of monads.

Deleuze: Obviously… It creates them.

The student: Well yes.

Deleuze: It chooses the world.

The student: So, for me, that leaves me to assume there’s one more.

Deleuze: One more, the monads? [The student: Yes]

The student: Yes.

                                                                                                        8

Deleuze: It’s God.

The student: Yes.

Deleuze: That’s all. [Laughter] … At this stage, right? Don’t make me say… At this stage, it’s
all. On this visit to the apartment where we are.

The student: That is, there’s a part of the world that exists… Ah, no, you said one, one, one
that…

Deleuze: Yes! It’s the little drawing that… It’s the little drawing, so maybe I have to redo it? We
recall that… [Pause; sound of Deleuze going to the board] I am going to make a little
illuminating drawing, but I don’t know if this is very clear now.5 [Pause] – Ah, that one was
prettier, right? -- I will do it in dots because as world, it only has virtual existence. [Pause] But it
becomes actual, it is only actual in the monads that express it and of which each one expresses it
[the world] in its entirety. What differences are there between monads? They will express it [the
world] in its entirety from a point of view – here this is getting complicated, it’s not going well at
all – from a point of view, that is, each has its privileged zone. And here, you ask me, does that
exist? Yes, that exists, but that exists there! As a result, one can say: the world exists only in
monads, but each monad has a regulated rapport with the world, according to its own point of
view. [Pause; Deleuze returns to his seat, and speaks to the student] No? I sense that you are not
Leibnizian… [She begins to answer, but is interrupted]

A student (from the back of the room): [Inaudible]

Deleuze: What?

The same student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Ah, no, impossible. There are… Unless I’ve misunderstood, there is an absolute
irreductibility of monads each in relation to the others. You see why? It’s because what he
[Leibniz] does not want is the idea of a single world. In some ways… --

A student [Someone speaks to Deleuze quietly]: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: There’s a what? There’s a machine? Oh, leave it, leave it… It’s fine, that means it’s
working… Yes, yes, I’m always surprised… -- Yes, [Deleuze speaks to someone near him,
possibly Isabelle Stengers] save me because…

Isabelle Stengers (possibly): In physico-mathematics, the problem is posed practically at the end
of the eighteenth century; the physicists-mathematicians constructed global functions, for
example, potential energy, the field – in fact, the ancestor of field theory today -- and at the
beginning [they] were constructed starting from forces which had purely local definitions. But
when one speaks of the definition of potential (right after Lagrange), force no longer appears
other than as a function that is a local derivative of a function that represents the integral aspect

                                                                                                      9

of the system at the same moment. During this whole time, there was a perfect symmetry
between the idea that forces were, basically, only local derivatives of the integral field or that the
integral field was constructed by integration starting from local forces. [Deleuze: yes, yes…] The
rapport of symmetry was posed by electromagnetism. [Deleuze say: yes, yes…] The field gained
its autonomy but there was always a problem: it didn’t reconcile Einstein’s relativity that is about
the gravitational field and electromagnetism … [The comments become unclear]

Deleuze: So, we agree, and we who are Leibnizians, we can say -- of course, it’s not he who
resolved the problems of contemporary science – but if we try to…, that he would resolve the
problem that you state at the level of the other floor, at the level of the theory of matter, which
we are going to see if we continue this visit. So, [Deleuze speaks to the woman student near him
who asked the previous question], agreed?
The student: Yes!
Deleuze: Are you a bit of a Leibnizian?
The student: Oh, I don’t know why I would be.
Deleuze: Oh, you mustn’t look too much for a why, don’t go looking for a why… And I’m going
to confess something: me neither. [Laughter] But me, I know why! [Laughter]
So let’s just continue in this room – I’m calling that a “room” in a residence -- this room of souls.
You see, it is enormous since it already contains the entire world, the world expressions, the
incompossible worlds, that’s it, freedom, in short, everything that we have seen. -- I am saying, a
final effort. -- Each of us has his/her subdivision, and it’s on this that I insist: we have not yet had
the body intervene. What we have had intervene is, you remember? Primary matter, that is, every
individual substance or monad includes a primitive, active force and a primitive, passive force,
[Pause] a primitive passive force named primary matter and that’s united with its finitude.
[Pause]

In other words, that I don’t express the totality of the world clearly, that I only have a tiny bit of
clear expression, what is that? It’s nothing other than a way of saying that there are several
monads, that I am not alone in the world. The darkness (le sombre) in me is part of others.
[Pause] Darkness – Yes you can open it [the door] now. It’s too warm… You can, go open up
from the back – [Shadow] is part of others; it’s the plurality of monads that results in only God
not being in shadows. But us, we have a dark part, a blackened part, we have a dark part that is
the depth of our soul. And that does not mean Evil. This will be the possibility of Evil, but it
does not mean Evil. It means that all truth must be ripped from this darkness. And the starting
point of all ripping of the truth is the tiny clear region that each of us expresses. And we saw this:
from that point onward, souls or spirits, but reasonable souls and spirits in fact have a manner of
gaining access to the truth.

And the last time we especially saw this thanks to the analysis of perception. The interior
perceptions of the monad, since in expressing the world, the monads perceive events; we saw
that these perceptions consisted of drawing from darkness a clarity or tiny unnoticed perceptions
– as [Leibniz] says, a remarkable perception. It’s still the theory of singular points, the theory of
remarkable points. And we saw how in each monad this constitution of a remarkable perception
occurred. And starting from the constitution of remarkable perception, we gain access to other

                                                                                                      10

truths that we analyzed, I remind you, and that were analyses of series, of series converging
toward requisites that go beyond things, perceptible things toward requisites and infinite series
that went farther, all the way to the idea of God. I won’t go back over that, but all of it increases
more and more the size of the apartment.

And well, we’ll finish with this floor and immediately ask: what, what is happening? There’s
only this, in my opinion, in the first apartment, that’s all there is. That’s all there is. We have
done it all, accounting for the enormous problems posed here: the problem of freedom, the
problem, etc. And suddenly what is it that’s going to define the other floor? Well, it’s: “I have a
body!” I must add, in my first floor, that there already is a great variety: it’s because all monads
do not have equal value (ne se valent pas). Not only did we see that monads had larger or smaller
clear zones of expression, but aren’t there already some that would be happy with a zone of
remarkable or distinctive (remarquée) perception and would not achieve divine truths, would not
reach infinite series? We have to leave this. What would these monads be? In other words, is
every monad a reasonable soul or spirit? [Pause] At the floor we are on, one can only encounter
reasonable souls or spirits.

So I say: go on, jump to the other floor, and what makes us jump there? Is it a kind of stairs?
What is it? It’s the announcement: I have a body. The announcement I have a body! [Pause]
Understand how this opens me up… I was telling you, what is it that’s going to open? What
requires that I have a body? It is the event. The event is not happy with the first floor. So, I have
to put it, if I attempt an outline, I have to put it [the event] between the two. And in the end
perhaps, all will be between the two since what was it we saw as apartment on the first floor? It’s
the event as spiritual determination. And what is the event as spiritual determination? It’s the
event or the inflection insofar as it is actualized, insofar as it’s actualized in an individual subject.
[Pause]

You recall: the world is a virtuality, and it’s here that the Leibnizian couple virtual-actual plays
out. The world is a virtuality that is actualized in each monad that expresses it. If you prefer: the
monad is the actual existence of the world, and the world exists actually only in the monads,
otherwise it’s pure virtuality. And what else does that event call for? It’s quite beautiful! It seems
to me very beautiful: so, finally, you say, ok, Socrates is seated in his prison because he finds it
good. But then we must add other things. He must also have knees that fold. In other words, I see
nothing more beautiful than to tell you such a simple thing: the event also must inscribe itself in
the body. The event must also inscribe itself in the body. In other words, the event is not only a
virtuality that awaits you and spies on you and that is actualized in your soul. The event is a
possibility that is realized in your body, and that is going to be, that’s going to be the lower floor.
[Pause]

But “I have a body” – why? First reason: because, well it’s precisely because I can only express
a clear, reduced portion, precisely because I can only express a tiny portion. God has no body.
[Pause] The body is exactly my subdivision. [Pause] And recall what we expressed forcefully:
above all, do not create the change that would render Leibniz incomprehensible. It’s not because
I have a body that I have a reduced portion of expression. It’s because I have a reduced portion
of expression that henceforth I have a body. In fact, what I express, what my monad expresses
clearly, it is what will be stated as concerning my body, and henceforth concerning the rapport of

                                                                                                    11

other bodies with mine. In other words, an event cannot be realized in a body that would not be
mine; it can only be realized in an interaction of bodies on my own. [Pause] That I have a body
is a result [Pause] of my finitude, that is, of the passive power of action (puissance) or, if you
prefer, due to my having only a very, very limited zone of clear expression.
A student: Is the realized event the deployment of time? Where is time?

Deleuze: The realized event is not the deployment of time; your question is quite correct since
we haven’t spoken about time and space at all. Time and space will follow this entire aggregate.
There is a space and a time on the upper floor, simply this time will be uniquely the order of
possible co-existents. For example, your monad, your spirit as spirit either coexists or does not
exist, for example, with Caesar’s. You are not of the same era. That is already completely
understood. So time as order of possible successions, and space as order of possible coexistences
belong to the first [upper] floor. This space, on the other hand, has nothing to do -- I am
answering your question the best that I can -- this space and this time still have nothing to do
with extension (étendue) and duration. Extension and duration belong to the other one.

The student: It’s infinite.

Deleuze: What rapport would there… It’s infinite? It’s infinite time? No, not in the first sense.
It’s not an infinite time since it is second in relation to what fulfills it. It is only infinite as a
consequence; there would not be an empty time and space that would be fulfilled by the action of
God. What I call space and time is the order of coexistences and of successions between monads,
so that to say they could change its location, its places in space, or moments in time, without
themselves changing, would make no sense.

The same student: It would be infinitely virtual?

Deleuze: It’s infinitely virtual? No, [Deleuze laughs] well, yes and no, yes and no. It is virtual if
you identify it in the time of the world, of the expressed. It is actual if you take it as the order of
succession of monads, of monads that are actual. The complicated problem will be mathematical,
because you already sense that on the first [upper] floor, there is a logic of time defined as the
order of successions, for example, or a logic of space, and Leibniz will insist a lot on the
distinction of words. On this floor, he only uses the terms spatium¸ space, and tempus, time.
When you see the word extensio or extensum, they never refer to that; on the contrary, they refer
to something that already concerns the body. So the problem is what rapports are there between
the spatio and the extensio, for example. This will be, I believe, one of the most audacious
mathematical theories of Leibniz. But finally, there you are, this is all I can say quickly.

So, I am saying, you see: each of us has a body; each of us has a body, and at the same time, one
has a body on which other bodies interact. [Pause] See Monadology for example. – [Deleuze
looks for his text, unsuccessfully] I don’t know… No matter, I’ve quoted them elsewhere, and so
this is enough. Monadology, it’s a tiny little text. [Laughter] [Pause]

And there is already a problem, you see, since you have two systems; two floors are subordinated
to two completely different modes of construction. The first [upper] floor has for its mode of
construction [Pause] a virtual world [Pause] that only exists actually in each monad; in other

                                                                                                       12

words, each monad expresses the totality of the world and includes the totality of the world. At
the level of bodies where you are, this is no longer that at all. Bodies are outside one another and
interact one upon the other. Monads, on the contrary, are such that the world is interior to each of
them, and they are without windows or doors, that is, they do not interact. Each expresses the
world for itself, without doors or windows, whereas here, there is an interaction, an interaction of
bodies. [Pause]

And I would say: what I express clearly in the world, these are bodies that affect mine; these are
the bodies that directly affect my own, and it is through this process of affection, then, of the
interaction of bodies, that something on that floor is going to respond to the interior perceptions
of monads. We saw it the last time, when I tried to analyze the example of the drop of water and
the wave, [Pause] and we saw that between the liquid body and my body, at the limit, a kind
differential rapport, dx/dy, was constituted; on the other floor, a distinguished perception was
constituted in the monad: I heard the sound of the water. You already see that there is a
correspondence between the two floors, but each of them has its law – they do not obey the same
law. There is a law that is the interaction of bodies upon each other, and another law that is:
monads, [Pause] each of which expresses the entire universe, and that do not communicate with
one another.

So, that creates a problem for us. I mean, how to take account of such a difference between the
two floors? But what is there between the two floors? This is the same as asking: what is my
body made of? If we asked that, that would almost be enough for us. So, make an effort: what is
my body made of? What is the body made of? It’s not easy to understand, in Leibniz, what the
body is made of, and for me, this seems to be one of the greatest mysteries in all the philosophies
of the seventeenth century. I would say that a body is made – not for everyone, in fact, but for
Leibniz and for Spinoza; there’s that in common between Leibniz and Spinoza perhaps. -- In
Leibniz and Spinoza, a body is made of an infinity of infinitely tiny actual parts. Any body is
constituted by an infinity of infinitely tiny actual parts. One cannot reach a final part. It’s what
we call the actual infinite (l’infini actuel). [Pause] You have to imagine it, that what’s so great,
you have to imagine it, and it’s quite properly unimaginable. It’s mathematisable, but it’s
unimaginable.

Follow me: that is opposed to two things. It’s opposed, on the one hand, to atoms. With atoms,
there is always, however far off that this might be, there is always a final part, an irreducible
final part. There, on the contrary, it’s an infinity of actual parts such that there is no final part,
and any part still includes an infinity of actual parts. And on the other hand, it’s not a divisible
kind to infinity, it’s not infinitely divisible since [there’s] the infinity of actual parts such that no
part can be said to be the smallest; [they] are precisely given actually, exist actually, and do not
depend on the process of division that the aggregate is forced to undergo. [Pause]

It’s what these authors will say or try to explain by saying: these are non-numerable
multiplicities, that is, [Pause] that are not of the nature of the number. [Pause] They are, properly
speaking, innumerable, which does not keep us from saying that a body is the double of another.
A body can very well be the double of another, but it includes, no less than the other, an infinity
of infinitely tiny actual parts. Is such a conception… It’s what Leibniz will affirm ten times by
saying: the only infinite is actual – and quite often, I believe I’ve told you this too quickly, but I

                                                                                                       13

repeat it -- quite often someone criticized other Leibniz texts where Leibniz says that
infinitesimal calculus, or even the calculus of infinite series, is only a mathematical fiction. But it
seems quite evident to me that there is no contradiction, and that means that even infinitesimal
calculus does not take account of this state of the actual infinite.

So, assume [there are] collections of infinite parts, these are parts of infinite parts, without your
being able to reach the final one, and that nonetheless are actually given, contrary to what
happens in a divisibility to infinity. Every body is of this type. [Pause] When I say, I have a
body, I mean [that] I consist of an infinity of infinitely tiny parts, actually, actually. [Pause]

A student: Is it because they are actual that one avoids Zeno’s paradox, that is… ? [Deleuze’s
voice covers the student’s complete question]

Deleuze: That’s it, absolutely. That’s also why there is in this a particular conception of
movement that depends on force.

The student: Movement in the process of occurring.

Deleuze: That’s it.

The woman student (near Deleuze): So the soul is finite, but not the body?

Deleuze: No. The question is not about knowing whether the soul is finite but not the body. The
question is that everything is at once, except God, finite and infinite. That is, for God, its account
is covered, it is infinite. Whew, that’s done, it’s done (fini), if I dare say that, no more discussion.
But everything that is finite is infinite from a certain aspect, and some infinities, I was telling
you, that’s it. [Interruption in the BNF recording; text from WebDeleuze] [1:09:46] It seems to
me that the secret of seventeenth century thought is the distinction of orders of infinity. And, if
God is infinite and if it is the primary infinity, it’s because it is stated as: infinite through the self
(infini par soi). It is infinite through the self. But immediately, there is a second infinity that is
the infinite through its cause. [Return to the recording] [1:09:48]

Part 3

Infinity through its cause is that of creatures. So, monads are infinite through their cause. Why
are they infinite? No, rather, they are finite; they are not infinite because these are creatures,
created by God. But they are infinite, simply infinite through their cause, and why? Because God
creates them in such a way that they express the totality of an infinite world. And their formula is
that, henceforth, they will have an infinity of predicates, and this infinity through its cause has
for expression, we saw this, 1 over infinity (1 / infini); whereas God through its cause would
have for expression infinity over 1 (infini / 1), that is, infinity as individuality, infinity as
personal being. So, on the first [upper] floor of monads, they are finite and they are infinite.

Now, when we reach bodies and aggregates of actually infinite parts to infinity, it’s the third
sense of infinity, specifically: an infinity that is caught in limits, a portion of matter, and
whatever might be the limits and the narrowness of limits considered, that is properly speaking

                                                                                                         14

non-enumerable (indénombrable). So it’s something finite (du fini) since it is caught between
limits; it is infinite since it includes an infinity of actual parts. It’s the third infinity. Are there any
others? Alas, there are still others, but we will stick with these because it’s the three great, they
are the three great modes of infinity. Once again, what I am saying is not valid for everyone, but
only for Leibniz and Spinoza.

So I say: that’s what it is, first, having a body. Fine, and what does that mean? You remember, so
let us add: Why did I have a body? I had a body because I only saw, I only had a subdivision,
etc., I only had a tiny clear subdivision. But why did I only have a tiny clear subdivision?
Because I was a creature, because I was finite, in other words, because I have a primary matter,
and a primary matter, as we saw, is not having a body; it’s the requirement for having a body.
And so, the requirement for having a body, so fine, there it’s satisfied. [Pause] This is why
Leibniz will say… These infinite aggregates of actually infinite tiny parts, you must not be
surprised that he calls them secondary matter. I’ve barely said that, and I must tell you, expect
me to have to correct this; it’s not enough. But it’s an aspect of secondary matter. Secondary
matter will be the form through which matter realizes the requirement of primary matter, [Pause;
a student seems to pose a question] … of finitude. It returns in our entire story: we are finite, so
we can only express a finite part, so we have a body.

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Ah, there is an immanence of the monad in primary matter, absolute, completely.
[Deleuze speaks to the students nearby him] – Hey, that’s getting complicated, right? But at the
same time, this should be concluded because… So you do see the problem that we are now
facing? It’s fine, but… -- What is my body? How is it my body? Something must constitute my
body. [Pause] I have a finite aggregate of infinitely tiny material parts, but how does all that
concern me? [Pause]

Secondary matter also has two aspects, and we have only given one aspect of secondary matter.
It’s that this infinite aggregate of infinitely tiny matter includes at the same time an infinity of
tiny souls …

A student: The souls. [Repeated for another student]

Deleuze: … tiny souls, as if we were going back up to the first [upper] floor. The tiny souls, you
will see, the tiny souls, but what? -- I hesitate between two things: if I go very slowly, we will
get lost; if I go real fast, we will get even more lost. -- Secondary matter should include… I
really don’t know… Wait, yes! An infinite aggregate of actually infinite tiny parts, but they only
belong to me under the hypothesis of an infinity of tiny souls.

But he’s Cartesian nonetheless; there is a real distinction between soul and body. Yes! But you
remember that it seemed to me to be one of Leibniz’s most astonishing bold strokes: the real
distinction does not imply separability. My body is constituted by an infinity of tiny souls
animating an infinity of infinitely tiny organic parts – the machine going all the way to infinity.
Are both really distinct? Yes, but that does not keep them from being inseparable, hence the
astonishing theory of the living being (du vivant). That’s it, the status of the living being. [Pause]

                                                                                                    15

Fortunately – good, I prefer going quickly, but still we get the impression of losing it all. Then
what? Where are we? Do we even recall where we are in this? Yes we do! -- Glittering formula,
the light arrives: it will suffice to say that you, each of you, is a dominant monad, and insofar as
you are a dominant monad, you have a body. Dominant monad means: you are a reasonable soul,
[Pause] and as such, you have a body, with a brain – there is no soul without a brain – you have
a body with a brain. Your body is made of what? Of an infinity of actually infinite tiny parts,
[Pause] but inseparable from an infinity of dominated monads [Pause] that are themselves not
reasonable but animal or sensitive. [Pause] Hence this extraordinary vitalism that can state at the
same time: so there is no living matter, no, all matter is matter, that’s all. Simply put, there will
be inseparability of the secondary matter and of the tiny souls, that is, of the dominated monads.
[Pause] Only, [what] if that were everything? That’s not going to work so easily! For me, in my
view, this is one of the greatest organicisms ever created in philosophy. As Whitehead liked to
call his philosophy organicist, organicism, this is yet another reason to compare them.

You already see where that leads us if I wanted to save some time. It’s no longer a question of
saving time! If I wanted to save time, what is the situation of animals? It’s complicated for
animals because although we say that animals do not have a reasonable soul – that they don’t
attain necessary truths, they don’t attain infinite series, they don’t do mathematics, they don’t
know God, etc. – they nonetheless have a tiny clear portion. [Pause] And while they don’t do
reasoning, they register consecutive actions (consécutions), as [Leibniz] says, in their monads.
And we saw that psychology of the animal was truly something fundamental for Leibniz. Fine.

“I am dying!” You recall what happens when I die. We have seen it because that good news
elated us. [Laughter] We saw it right at the beginning: it’s fabulous, when I die! My reasonable
soul is reduced to a sensitive or animal soul, but it remains, it remains. [Pause] It’s the famous
folds, pleats, and unfolds, and it will be re-unfolded when God calls it to the last judgment. You
recall this very strange idea that it had [Deleuze bursts out laughing] that the souls called to
being reasonable were not so from the very start of the world – in fact, this would be idiotic. Me,
my reasonable soul, you think, and yours as well, it was indeed necessary that we wait to be born
into the order of time, into the order of succession, on the first [upper] floor. God had to call us,
that is: unfold our own parts so that we might express the world. But before we existed, we
existed as what? As an animal or sensitive soul, as a worm soul. Simply, what was it that
distinguished us from a worm? One couldn’t know the answer in that era. As [Leibniz] says: it’s
as if God had issued, in certain sensitive souls, an official document, a document that they were
going to achieve reason, etc.6 In the end, that’s the Leibniz that affects us the most, not the one
that… So fine, I’ll stop on that note.

When we die, we again become a sensitive soul belonging to secondary matter. -- We have only
a tiny effort to make – [Interruption of the WebDeleuze text] Let’s take the law of the body:
secondary matter and all the tiny, dominated monads, [Return to WebDeleuze text] what he
[Leibniz] most often calls the substantial forms. All substantial forms never cease coming and
going. Why? By virtue of the first floor. The law of the first floor, if you recall, [is] the universal
interaction of bodies. Our body never ceases changing parts, and not only does it not cease
changing organs, but through this, it never ceases changing souls, that is, substantial forms, since
substantial forms or tiny souls are strictly inseparable from organs. [Pause] What does something

                                                                                                 16

so simple mean: you have a soul of your heart, you have your very own soul, you have your soul,
but you have a soul of your heart, you have a soul of your arm, you have a soul of it all? You
have millions and millions of souls, but they never cease changing at the same time as the parts
of your organism – all that never ceases changing. Leibniz found a metaphor more beautiful than
Heraclitus’s river to say everything changes. He says: it’s like Theseus’s boat, our body is like
Theseus’s boat that the Greeks always repaired, always a hole, always a hole. That comes down
to saying that in every body, atoms never cease changing.

A student: From this angle, [Xavier] Bichat spoke of the infinities of partial deaths.

Deleuze: Completely, partial deaths, because… It’s not difficult, to calculate a partial death in
Leibniz, and at the same time, how is it that there is no total death? You take an organism, you
take your organism at moment a, and here is what you are doing: all the parts of this organism
and all the souls of this organism do not depart at the same time. So you have a first time marker,
at moment b; let’s say that region a prime subsisted and that region a second has disappeared,
and more and more closely. And you wonder: in relation to moment a that you left, at what
moment are all the parts renewed? But at that moment, in relation to the preceding moment,
nothing prevents a certain number of parts, or rather of non-numerable parts, from still
remaining. We can call “period of an organism” a time distance, the time difference in order to
renew completely the parts and souls of the organism, once it is said that all this never occurs at
once, that it never happens at once, and that, moreover, there is never a moment in which
everything is renewed. If I could redo my drawing… I start off from moment a, to moment b, I
can say -- I am saying anything at all: ten molecules have gone, to moment c, twenty molecules
have gone. But ten new ones have arrived, and these remain. So that is one period. -- I see your
fading and beaten gaze; well, that’s understandable. –Your [organism] period never coincides
with a disappearance or a total birth. It is always straddling one part that remains and another
part that is departing.

But how do we conjugate, simultaneously, it’s my body and it never ceases leaving? And in the
end, Leibniz has a lot of difficulty, and if I try to summarize, I again stumble onto something that
we began to discuss the last time. Yes, we must maintain the following two things: what is going
to define a body, with its escapes and returns, with its new provisions (fournitures) and its new
departures: what is going to define a body as my own, it’s -- excuse the expression – it’s a seam
(couture), a kind of seam or knot, a link, that Leibniz calls the vinculum. [Pause] What
corresponds to my dominant monad is a vinculum that links the dominated monads with the
organs.7 [Pause]

How did he conceive of this vinculum? This vinculum is called substantial, that is, depending
directly on the substance. [Pause] It belongs to me, dominant monad; it’s in the Letters to Des
Bosses, it’s to me that it belongs -- the texts are very, very difficult; I am only giving you an
outline, although they have been very well interpreted, on one hand, by [Yvon] Belaval in his
Introduction to Leibniz’s Thought, and on the other hand, by a philosopher named Christiane
Frémont who published the translated letters, the Letters to Des Bosses,8 that still does not keep
this text from being quite difficult. -- I am saying, it seems to me that the vinculum belongs to
me as dominant monad. In this regard, all the organs and dominated monads that compose my
organism, and that come and go, that is, arrive and leave, do not depend on the vinculum. They

                                                                                                       17

belong to me insofar as they enter in, but they leave and they take another vinculum, or else they
do not take any vinculum at all. [Pause] And that’s what will produce the universal interaction of
bodies. [Pause]

So fine, let’s try to see this. -- I am speaking very quickly. All this is already quite difficult. -- I
am trying to create an organizational structure; that’s all very fine, you might say: try to create a
structure of the great categories that you were just talking about.9 I would reply:
First: events, [Pause] intrinsic singularities, inflections.
Second: monads, [Pause] active primitive forces [Pause] that express the world or fold events.
[Pause] It’s the actuality of the world. [Pause]
Third: the monads not only have an active primitive force, but a passive primitive force; it is
their finitude, or their primary matter, as a function of which they only express [Pause] a finite
portion of the world. They only express clearly a finite portion of the world.
Fourth: if I only express a finite portion of the world, I have a body, which is the same as saying:
if I have a primary matter, it expresses a requirement (exigence): requirement of having a body.
Fifth, the body is the third form of the infinite, [Pause] the actually infinite aggregate of
infinitely tiny and non-enumerable parts. [Pause] In this regard, it is secondary matter [Pause]
and remains inseparable from an infinity of derived monads, of sub-monads of derived monads
or substantial forms that are dominated souls in rapport with my dominant soul.
Fifth or sixth [Several students say, Sixth] – Oh, it’s clear, it’s quite ok, you cannot do any
more… -- Sixth, fifth, two aspects. [Pause] The secondary matter belongs to me, belongs to my
monad inasmuch as it enters under the vinculum, the chain, the substantial chain that belongs to
me or that characterizes me. In this, I draw greatly from the text [the Letters to] Des Bosses: the
vinculum belongs to me and is fixed, the vinculum is connected to the dominant monad. --
[Deleuze perhaps reacts to someone who wishes to interrupt him] I am continuing what I am
saying because otherwise, I’ll no longer understand anything. – On the other hand, the same
ones, that is, the organic parts and the dominated monads, never cease coming and going, like
Theseus’s boat, according to whether they change to another vinculum … [The woman student
near Deleuze says something to him] Yes, they pass to another monad, [Pause] or free
themselves from any vinculum. [Pause]
Seventh : in any event, one gets situated here [Laughter] since, [Pause] at death, -- there is a
problem in this, you know, since he didn’t want, he doesn’t want, [Leibniz] already created such
a beautiful theory of damnation, so we can’t expect everything from him; he didn’t want to
arrange one with the other, the problem of death and the problem of the organism, I believe. –
For when we die, once again, we lose our reasonable soul that again becomes a sensitive soul, so
it loses its vinculum. Does it lose its vinculum? If it loses its vinculum, everything is lost: how
will one recognize the body that belongs to us? You get it? Oh, the problem is terrible [Deleuze
laughs].
Fortunately there is this strange text: before we are called to become reasonable, and once dead,
when we cease being reasonable, there is this strange thing: the official act (l’appel scellé). My
soul has again become animal, but it contains the official act, and in my opinion, this is the only
way for God to recognize his own, otherwise he could not recognize them. Unless one has to
resort to a mystery, and as at the end, [Leibniz] says in the correspondence with Des Bosses, it’s

                                                                                                      18

the mystery of transubstantiation: “this is my body, this is my blood.” It’s an example in which
monads, dominated monads – for it isn’t Christ’s monad -- the dominated monads are monads of
the body and blood of Christ, and then the monads of bread and wine that enter into a strange
relation.
Final point – It doesn’t matter. We’ve done all we could. – Final point – But I would say, to
satisfy everyone, on this point, we haven’t yet completely finished, right? Have a bit more
courage in this.
Final point, I am saying: well, you understand… what should you understand? -- Yes, our
program from the start of the year is almost done, specifically: the soul is full of folds that it
partially unfolds. So this was the first Baroque proposition: the folds in the soul. It unfolds them
partially, something we saw it through the operations for seeking the truth, etc. Second
proposition: matter is full of pleats, [Pause] and it’s the other floor. Matter is full of pleats that
shelter, liberate and cause to circulate infinities of actual parts and infinities of dominated
monads inseparable from actual parts. [Pause]
Upstairs, in the events, there were singularities. Down below, if we had the time, we would see
that in Leibniz’s physics, a physics of extrema, minima and maxima, is going to develop, and in
fact, in certain conditions, which are those of the physical world, singular points – but these are
things that we would have had to consider [with] physics – singular points become minima and
maxima, extrema. What is there between the two? There is this whole story of organisms; there is
the whole story of vitalism that causes us to pass perpetually from one floor to the other. [Pause]
What can we conclude about this? … Yes?
A student: That makes me think of Bergson because that helps us understand the question of
difference between qualitative and quantitative multiplicities. One could say that the qualitative
multiplicity is at the intersection of two infinite lines. These infinites would be the infinite of self
and the [inaudible] infinite. What I mean… I can give an example: what most appeals to me is to
arrive at considering space, or what he calls extension, under the category of something purely
qualitative. Could we say that a qualified space -- that there is something that occurs -- is at the
intersection of two infinites, an infinity which is that of the body in movement, at that point, it’s
the infinities of infinitely tiny actual parts, and the other infinite line, that would be light
(lumière) which is a non-enumerable?
Deleuze: Yeah. I am going to tell you because I prefer the way in which you ended [the question]
to the way that you began, because you are as sensitive as I am to the danger of creating
comparisons. As concerns the problem of multiplicities, which is, in fact, a fundamental
problem, we can say this generally: in my view, Bergson comes at a crucial moment in the
theory of multiplicities and is going to attempt a powerful move in order to cause it [the theory]
to emerge from the stage of mathematics. There are two authors who simultaneously undertake
this move to cause multiplicity to emerge from the simple stage of the theory of mathematics in
order to introduce it into philosophy: it’s Husserl and it’s Bergson. That’s a first point. What
interests Bergson is a particular point: the rapport between discrete multiplicities and continuous
multiplicities. Fine. Is he interested? Yes, he’s interested in the problem of the one and the
multiple. Yes, since yet again, there is no one and multiple, there are only multiplicities, and it’s
through this that he is profoundly modern. There is no longer one and multiple; the question of
the one and the multiple is no longer posed in philosophy, etc.

                                                                                                     19

I would say for Leibniz, to avoid confusion, there is something missing in Bergson and that
exists in Leibniz, and something missing in Leibniz and that exists in Bergson – that’s why
philosophy is so beautiful. What is missing in Leibniz is the suppression of the problem of the
one and the multiple. He will continue to think – he’s a man of the seventeenth century – he
continues to think in terms of a one and a multiple. Moreover, with his conception of harmony,
you have multiples-to-multiples rapports, but the multiples-to-multiples rapports are
fundamentally calibrated to multiples-one rapports, in Leibniz. On the other hand, you have in
Leibniz an attempt and an exploration of types of multiplicities in all the senses that here go
beyond, that do not at all correspond to the Bergsonian situation. So if I attempted the three,
specifically the three simplest ones, it already is not some multiples, the three infinities; it’s only
two of them: the multiplicity of monads and the multiplicity of bodies.
So this is marvelous because you are giving me our ending. All I need to say is, but yes, just
consider: what does Leibniz call harmony?10 What does he call harmony? What he calls harmony
is two things: all monads express the same world, but [Pause] this world only exists in the
monads; they have no doors or windows, they have no communication, they exert no action on
each other. Each monad has only internal actions, each monad acts on itself, in relation to its
predicates; no monad acts on another one. They are closed off, and they simple express the same
world. One might say that between the monads, there is no direct action, but there is a harmony.
Still they must have expressed the same world once we admit that this world does not exist
outside them. Harmony will be precisely this. There would be no harmony if they expressed a
same world that existed outside them.
If a world is supposed to exist between all of us and we were in harmony, there would be no
problem – what I see face on, you see from behind, period, point made. But that’s not how it is.
The world does not exist outside monads; henceforth, in order for this to be the same world,
monads have to be in harmony with one another. As [Leibniz] says: it’s the proof of God’s
existence. If there were no God, you expressing the same world would be excluded, or else the
common world would really have to exist. But if it is true that the world is uniquely the virtuality
that only gains actuality in each monad that expresses it, the world is nothing other than the preestablished harmony of monads among themselves. It’s as if God had synched all the clocks with
each other – understand the abominable misunderstanding it would be to believe that this means:
everyone is on the same time; on the contrary, that means that when it’s 1:05 for me, there is
someone who is at 1:10, and that between the two portions of expression, there is linkage. That’s
the pre-established harmony of substances between them or monads. [Pause]
But second point -- you understand this; it’s essential. I don’t know what more to say for this to
be concrete -- [Pause] I am leaving, you are staying. [Pause] If there’s a hole, it’s like a mirage,
and if there is nothing in this hole, this universe hole (trou d’univers), there is no pre-established
harmony. There must be a connection between what ends in a monad and what begins in another.
So the connection is not direct since monads do not act upon each other. Thus, there is preestablished harmony of monads between themselves. All of them unfold in the same world
although they do not communicate with each other, although none communicates with another.
But then, -- a final effort… final effort… This is some Leibniz in a rush. A final effort, that
makes me think of the galloping visit through the Louvre in Godard [in Bande à part]. Final
effort and here we go. – You remember? But, what is my body if not the shadow that you cast
over me? The pre-established harmony, suddenly, is the harmony of souls and body, and in what
way? [It’s] not only insofar as it would be insufficient, not only insofar as they obey different

                                                                                                  20

laws, [Pause] and, above all, insofar as they have different natures. For, and it’s one of the most
fundamental points in Leibniz, [there is] the critique he makes of certain disciples of Descartes,
notably Malebranche and other Cartesians. [Pause]-- So there, really, fast, fast, fast. – I’m
saying: there is nonetheless something odd in our reflection, that often we are told that
philosophy has considered causes and that science imposed the sole idea that was truly scientific
and which was [the idea] of laws.
And it’s not true, these are things one must not believe. The notion of law came into being in the
seventeenth century, and in the seventeenth century, it did so in the most theological systems in
the world. In Auguste Comte, there is something that does not work well when he says that the
cause is metaphysical – he meant something else, but it doesn’t matter. Taken literally, Comte is
truly catastrophic: one must not say cause is metaphysics and that science arrives with the idea of
law, because those who first discovered and constituted a veritable concept of laws were the
Cartesians. Why? Because God alone being the cause, Nature is ruled by laws. They are the ones
that hoisted up a concept of laws defined essentially by generality and -- I am going fast, but still
this is inadequate – but, principally by generality, and thus distinguishing miracle and law,
miracle referring to particular desires (volontés) of God, and generality referring to general
desires of God. God operates through general will, which will be Malebranche’s entire theory,
called occasionalism. No matter. [Pause]
And here is Leibniz’s objection. I don’t mean that he’s right, because it’s a huge discussion
between Malebranche and Leibniz, and Leibniz’s objection seems splendid to me. He says: fine,
whatever you want, God operates through general laws, with one condition: it’s that bodies, or
souls, [Break in the WebDeleuze recording] that is, the terms that connect to general laws, must
be capable of doing so. Malebranche’s project, if you will, is the so-called occasionalist project.
Malebranche’s project: one must have an occasion, set by God: 212 degrees, right? It’s an
occasion like another. – [Deleuze pauses a moment, saying: Oh, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la] –
It’s the occasion, general law, liquid’s passage to steam, transformation of liquid into steam,
which gives us the law, water boils at 212 degrees, you see? It’s the analysis between an
occasion and a general relation. Or else, in the whole theory of laws of movement, you have
shock and the occasion. Shock is an occasion, the shock of two bodies is an occasion, and the
general law is the transformation of movement, the transformation of movement between the
body that shocks and the shocked body, although the shock itself is the immobile body. It’s
precisely through this that there’s an occasion. So this is the passage from one moment to the
other. You understand? This will be, for example, the example that, applied to the soul and to the
body, will be called occasionalist.
I find that Leibniz has an astonishing reply… [Brief interruption of the BNF recording, then
return] [1:56:11] But what interiority enters into a body, [Pause] and at the extreme, what
interiority into a soul? [Return to the Web Deleuze text] Leibniz was able to show us that there
was an interiority in the body, and that the interiority in the body was force. And Malebranche is
embarrassed since it was force in the sense of motor force (force motrice), or work, something
that Malebranche and Descartes, that Malebranche coming after Descartes knew nothing about.
So [Malebranche] could conceive of a definition of the body as a function of exteriority.
But Leibniz arrives and says: but by virtue of modern science – it’s Leibniz’s whole theme – you
know, in the end he tells them: I really don’t want to toss Aristotle in your faces, I don’t really
want to resuscitate Aristotle, whereas you believe that you are done with Aristotle, but in the
name of modern science, [Leibniz] says, I must repeat to you: do not believe that Nature has lost

                                                                                                                         21

all interiority. For a body to observe a law, there must still exist an interior Nature that makes
this observation possible and necessary.
What does that mean? Water boils at 212 degrees, fine, you haven’t said anything; you will have
satisfied yourself with an extrinsic discourse, as he says, if you do not find in the interior nature
of water, [Pause] why these 212 degrees? [Pause] That is, why does what you call “occasion”
precisely make possible this transformation? You will tell me why, but science stopped doing so
a long time ago. Not at all. There is a whole series of phases of transformative states, and all this
leads you towards a qualitative physics that was present in Aristotle, that Descartes completely
missed, and that Leibniz goes on to reconstitute as a new physics – it’s not at all a “return to
Aristotle” – but is like reprising Aristotle based on new data.
So, I mean, pre-established harmony, on one hand, will be the harmony of monads among
themselves, the harmony of souls between themselves, on one hand, and on the other hand, the
harmony of souls with bodies, that is, in the way bodies themselves include an interiority that
might place them in harmony with the interiority of souls. That is, it is not enough that bodies be
governed by a regime of interaction; a dynamic interiority is also necessary, a force of bodies
that might be in harmonic rapport with souls as primitive forces, the forces of bodies in harmonic
rapport and that, however, are forces of bodies. Work, mobilized action, is what he will call
derivative forces, in distinction from forces of souls that are primitive forces.
So next time, that’s what I would like to do, [consider] this precise point of harmony: how
Leibniz, to have us understand this, precisely needed a concept of harmony, and the question:
does this concept of harmony owe something, henceforth, to music? But, don’t forget at least this
theme of harmony; it must guide you. The hypothesis I am proposing to you is that in every
sense of harmony as we have just seen it, in all the senses in Leibniz, harmony presents itself
under this double aspect: first, the expressed does not exist outside the expresser, and you will
see that this works at each stage. Second, the expresser exists only through a regulated
correspondence with the expressed. At that point begins a kind of Baroque music that
accompanies Baroque philosophy.
I thank you, and until next week. [End of the recording] [2:01:41]

Notes

  While one more session, on 2 June, will follow this one, Deleuze will introduce the 2 June session by saying that
“although final classes occur, they don’t always occur when one thinks,” that “final classes are always already
done,” thus implying that the previous one or two sessions were, in fact, the final classes. Hence, the session that
follows here is, for all practical purposes, the final lecture session that Deleuze presents in his career, the 2 June
session being oriented toward presentations by several students as a working group on the theme of “harmony”.
  Roughly, these cycles corresponded to undergraduate, graduate and doctorate levels, respectively.
  Deleuze refers back to the start of his development on the Baroque in chapter 2; cf. The Fold (University of
Minnesota Press, 1993), pp. 14-17; Le Pli (Minuit, 1988), pp.20-23, as well as in the early sessions, notably 28
October and 4 November 1986.
  On point of view, see the 18 November 1986 session.
  This is no doubt the drawing found at the end of chapter 2 in The Fold, p. 26; Le Pli, p. 36, the French version
conforming better to the way Deleuze describes it here.
  On the theory of death and birth and on the “official document”, see the 4 February 1987 seminar, and also The
Fold, p. 153, note 37; Le Pli, p. 101.

                                                                                                                 22

  On the “substantial vinculum”, cf. The Fold, pp. 110-111; Le Pli, pp. 148-150.
  In Christiane Frémont, L’être et la relation, Vrin, 1981.
  For a complementary summary, see The Fold, pp. 114-116; Le Pli, pp. 152-156.
   The final chapter of The Fold, entitled “The New Harmony”, addresses this topic, notably pp. 128-138; Le Pli, pp.
180-189.