1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on the Apparatuses of Capture and War Machines, 1979-1980

Lecture 04, 27 November 1979

Transcribed by Annabelle Dufourcq; augmented transcription, Charles J. Stivale

Translated by Charles J. Stivale

Part 1
Concerning our next meeting, I am saying, eh, next time, that at the request of many of those
who were working with me last year, who wanted us to do a restricted session, not at all for the
purpose of excluding anyone, on the contrary, quite the contrary, uh ... but because we will come
back to certain notions that we had developed the next year... uh, last year and, as we will
assume they are familiar, this will be like a kind of session that really cannot be of interest, I
believe, which can only be followed by those who did the work last year. So, the others, if they
want, I'll meet them the week after, a way of returning the favor, on the other hand, for
“precursor” sessions which will be only for those ... [Laughter] ... There you go. I don't see how,
but ... Fine.
Some students: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: About that, the last time, we had made some progress, not much, regarding ...,
following the traces of a topic that we needed, namely the possibility of conceiving of a
coexistence in a social field, a coexistence and an encroachment of very diverse social
formations. And we assumed as a hypothesis the possibility of defining the various social
formations by processes which we conveniently called “machinic processes”, and we had
identified the coexistence and the interpenetration of these processes. So, no attempt had been
made at all now to speak of societies, for example, primitive insofar as being social formations,
but we had identified a process which, no doubt, appeared in so-called primitive societies, but
was also appearing elsewhere and where this process was called “anticipation-conjuration”.
We spoke more exactly of the State apparatus, no longer as a social formation or state society;
we spoke of the apparatus of capture, another process. We spoke of war machines, we spoke of
... etc. [Deleuze does not finish] And we had outlined this social field where, then, when social
formations are no longer related to modes of production that they would be supposed…. er…
that they would be assumed to suppose, but are related to the processes that they envelop, the
very idea of a coexistence of all the formations in the social field seemed to us to be… to be
verified, to be established. This is where I am asking if there are any points ... or else if I might
continue ..., but I believe there are some points.
A student: [Inaudible]

                                                                                                      2

Deleuze: What? Yes, yes. Go ahead, talk. Yes.
A woman student: It's about the city and the State.
Deleuze: Ah, on the city and the State. We had indeed seen, I recall, that in these social
formations, we had felt the need to distinguish the “city” form and the “State” form because it
seemed very important to us historically to understand, for example, why capitalism had gone
through the “State” form while the “city” form, in its beginnings, had given it so many chances
and so many opportunities. [Pause] What's going on? And we had tried to distinguish the “city”
form and the “State” form, whatever the competition between the two, whatever the way there
was in which the “State” form would later overwhelm the “city” form. We tried to distinguish,
here as well, two very different processes by defining the “city” form through the constitution of
instruments of polarization within a network, any city referring to other cities, while the “State”
form seemed to us to refer to some very, very different systems, systems of resonance that we
had tried to… to distinguish precisely from instruments of polarization.1 So, on this topic, did
you want to add something?
The same student: Yes. Anyway, there is someone who has done work on Paris in particular and,
from the 10th-11th century onward, and has been interested in seeing how Paris has resisted…
er… well, the State, studying this up to 1980. So, I will just read you a page where he talks about
Paris currently:
"The French villages did not want a train station, so they had to be built 2-3 kilometers from the
church in the open fields. For a long time, there was no continuity in the construction (tissu) built
between the old town center and its station. Then, little by little, around each station, the central
zero began to secrete a rectilinear coagulation of foreign activities. This hiatus is still often
noticeable; this is the story of the large number of Sainte-Emilie-Center and Sainte-Emilie-Gare
that dot the French countryside. Paris has shown a similar reaction. The battle between the city
and the State raged for fifty years and, in other forms, it has persisted until today ending and
shutting itself down in the metropolitan rail node which is the process of being completed.”
That is, in fact, he explains, afterwards, that the city of Paris had widths for the rails, finally the
gauge was at 1 meter 30 and that the rail network gauge was at 1 meter 40, and that it’s on this
point that all the resistance occurred and up to the present. And he says that it is only now, that
is, currently [late 1979], that the network of Les Halles has just connected the train system to the
metro system, with the resistance ending; that is, what had started several centuries ago, but, by
and large, particularly during the time of the French Revolution, that is, the struggle between
Paris and the State, has now ended with the junction of the RER in Les Halles with the metro.
Deleuze: Yeah. Indeed, it would be very, very important ...
Student: It was published ...
Deleuze: … and I think they must be from the school of [Fernand] Braudel, right?… I was
saying: it is really Braudel who, it seems to me, at least in France, launched this extremely deep
study into the at once polemical and competitive relationships between the city and the State

                                                                                                        3

which really constitutes something fundamental in the history of Europe, right? Braudel is surely
correct in saying, in Asia, it did not happen like that because, in Asia, there is a subordination ...,
in the history of Asia, there is a much more direct and fundamental subordination of the city to
the “State” form. But, in Europe, there was a kind of wavering, right, and really, I believe for the
birth of capitalism, it's a huge problem to wonder about, in fact, with all kinds of data, who
outlined the formation of capitalism according to the “city” form.2
And, once again, I recalled this sentence by Braudel, because it seems to me very good, that he
states: each time, there are two runners ... each time, there are two runners, and he says: it is the
hare and the tortoise. And, of course, it’s this is the city that’s the hare, right? And it is the
“State” form… the hare, it’s the “city” form, that is, it was at the highest speed and, for us, we
can even add that we gives the word “speed” a very precise meaning. It is not at all a metaphor;
it is really the speed of deterritorialization. There is a power of deterritorialization of the form…
in the “city” form much greater than in the “State” form… uh… I was trying to say this the last
time… because in the city, deterritorialization is truly dynamic, while State deterritorialization
may not be less so, but it is static.
And we tell ourselves: but, in fact, what would capitalism have been and how did it take shape
when it, and to the extent that it did, passes through the "city" form? What made it need the
"State" form? Or what occurred to make it choose the "State" form? This will be very important
for us to try to clarify this question. Here, I am saying immediately one of the hypotheses that I
see, which seems to me to be one of the most important -- I do not know if I had stated it -- it is
closely connected to a related topic, which we will also encounter, which we encountered last
year, namely that, in any case, there is a need -- both for the “city” form and for the “State” form
-- there is a need to appropriate, to capture a war machine.
And why am I saying that? Because at that point, maybe, everything just becomes a little bit
clearer. It seems to me that this is one of the reasons -- I am not saying at all the only one -- but
that the “city” form is not a good instrument for appropriating the war machine. That’s the
"State" form, because it is the "State" form that can make the investments in so-called warfare
"materiel". The “city” form has much less of this possibility. Once again, the “city” form, it’s not
that it does not generate and does not have…, that it does not appropriate its war machine, but it
essentially needs rapid wars, it needs rapid wars based on mercenaries. It is obvious that war or
the appropriation of the war machine will be oriented toward entirely different paths, starting
with national conscription, from the point of view of men, by material investment, from the point
of view of capital, and that it is… that is perhaps one of the main reasons that capitalism went
through the “State” form and did not limit itself to the “city” form, which implied that States…
well, as Braudel says, that the hare… that, uh the… the tortoise catches up with the hare. The
“State” form had to assert its size, its power apparatus -- which is not the same as that of the
power of cities – the State apparatus had to wield this power apparatus over the cities. Hence, in
fact, what the text you have just read confirms, the extraordinary mistrust both of cities in
relation to the “State” form and of the “State” form in relation to cities.

                                                                                                          4

The same student: Yes, finally, but that is especially related to circulation precisely. Because ...
they ...
Deleuze: Yes. Yes. Completely, since cities, insofar as ... as they are instruments of polarization
within a network, the city refers to another city or to other cities; it is essentially thought in terms
of entrances and exits, essentially, while the State is not that. Of course, there is an entry and exit
for the State; I am saying: this is not the main thing.
I want to say that, because, you understand, we will need to remember this point, that when we
manage to define social formations by processes (processes of capture, processes of…
anticipation-conjuration, etc.), we must see that these processes sometimes play out in a pure
state ... I can say a primitive society, okay, or a gang -- it is already not the same thing -- but
these are social formations in which really the anticipation process… uh… the anticipationconjuration mechanism trumps all others. But that is a first point of view.
A second point of view, we must see how each formation not only envelops the preeminent
process that corresponds to it, but adapts, adapts in its own way, the other processes. For
example, you will also find anticipation-conjuration processes in cities, in the "city" formation,
to ward off the state. You will also find anticipation-conjuration processes in capitalism to ward
off the limits of capitalism.3 So, if you will, each process plays a preferential role in a certain
type of formation, but it can very well be taken up in a completely different formation. That’s
why it creates a social field where everything necessarily coexists. You follow? Well. Good. So,
we’ll continue.
Another student: I have a question about last week.
Deleuze: Yeah!
The student: When we were talking about the last word, the last drink, the last love ...
Deleuze: Yeah!
The student: Maybe we could add: last assemblage in Beckett for ...
Deleuze: The last assemblage in Beckett, yes, why not? We'll see where we can put “the last” in
Beckett. Yes, there is a last love in ... which he weirdly calls first love, yes, there is all of that,
yes. Good.4
The student: And then, for [D.H.] Lawrence, I think you said once that you even have to
[Inaudible] love. You see?
Deleuze: Ah yes, this is quite simple, yes. What he means… It’s not all that simple, right, but
what Lawrence means when he says that, fine. Well, we’ll talk about all that.
So good, this is a new topic we are tackling today. I'm just asking you to sense that these topics
are very much a continuation of each other. Here, we find ourselves in the following situation:
we tell ourselves that our task, today, should be to build even a very abstract model, an abstract
model that we could call a “model of the primitive exchange”. In the background, we are

                                                                                                     5

concerned that, nonetheless, among all these mechanisms that we spoke about the last time, the
mechanism that we saw fit to call “anticipation-conjuration”, both interests me, but it was still
not left all that clear: what are these collective anticipations-conjurations? So, would a model of
primitive exchange allow us to move forward in this direction and, above all, would that allow us
to strengthen our hypothesis of a coexistence of the most diverse social formations in a given
field? And the basic conditions ... So, we're going to do it like that, uh ... if you will: we are
proposing, let's say ... uh, I guess we are proposing to build this abstract model of primitive
exchange.
At the point we find ourselves, we know what we cannot allow ourselves. What can't we allow
ourselves? Uh! And what must we allow ourselves? Well then, by definition, we have to allow
ourselves groups that are in a certain communication with each other and, in fact, -- I’m not
going back over this -- we do not believe, it does not seem necessary for us to presuppose what is
classically called the autarky of small primitive societies or their independence, or their
incommunicability. One assumes that primitive groups can be entirely in relation with one
another. Moreover, I assume that it's inevitable. It’s inevitable because primitive formations
already coexist with States, with apparatuses of Empire, that these apparatuses of Empire imply
and put the primitive groups into communication with each other, so we have every reason to
think that there are expressions of primitive exchange and not independent groups.
Moreover, I tell myself: there is communication between foreign groups as soon as there is, not
even writing (writing, that would refer to the State apparatus, to the apparatus of Empire), but as
soon as there is speech, as soon as there is language… uh… Something makes us anticipate that,
in the end, language, I understand this to include oral language; it does not exist simply for those
who speak the same language. I would even say more that language only exists to the extent that
there are already contacts between people who do not speak the same language. I mean: language
is inseparable from a function of translating languages and not from a function of communication
within one and the same language. Anyway, all that…, we offer ourselves this minimum:
primitive groups in relation to each other.
But there are things you cannot allow yourself. What is it? If we assume that there are primitive
exchanges, we cannot allow ourselves, first, the coexistence of a stockpile. I am stating the
conditions of the problem to me, right? I would have no problem with some of you saying: ah
well no, the problem for me is otherwise. Me, I am stating how it occurs for me. I cannot allow
myself the pre-existence of a stockpile for a very simple reason, which is what we saw the last
few times -- I won’t go back over this -- that, far from the stockpile presupposing a surplus, it
was the stockpile which constituted the surplus, and the stock was an act of the State apparatus.
So, if I'm looking for an expression for primitive exchanges that coexist -- let's understand this
well, which coexist with State apparatuses, but which do not constitute State apparatuses, since
they will both anticipate and ward off, you remember, State apparatuses -- I cannot assume that
primitive exchange implies a stockpile. At the most, I can say that it implies an elasticity of
supply and demand. That's enough for me, yes. There is a certain elasticity of supply and
demand, that is, sometimes they eat more, sometimes they eat less, good, so they can exchange

                                                                                                         6

food, etc., but I'm not demanding any ... any pre-existing stockpile. I'm just asking for some
evidence (données) of… say -- I'm using a common political economy term -- elasticity of
supply and demand. So, about primitive exchange, I am saying: impossible to allow oneself a
stockpile for [inaudible word] expresses it.
Second thing: impossible to allow yourself a balance or a monetary equivalent (or of another
type) for the same reason. Once again, these primitive formations coexist with the State
apparatus but involve other processes. Now, we have seen that, no less than the stockpile was an
act of the State apparatus, the market, currency, are acts of the State apparatus. And, in this
sense, we have already questioned without yet sufficiently justifying it, we have questioned the
idea that money can find an origin in trade, that is, in generalized forms of exchange, in order to
say: no, in any case, if there is an origin of money, it is on the side of taxation, that is, of a
fundamental State act, which we have to research. So, no way to provide yourself: balance,
equivalent or market, or the existence of a market.
Finally, third: no question either of allowing oneself the hypothesis of an intervention, in the
primitive exchange, of a labor or of a labor-time, of a necessary form of labor or of a socially
necessary labor-time for the production of the objects exchanged. Why? Because, there too, last
year we had already developed this, but we will have to discover it again under another aspect,
this idea, for a very simple reason: it’s that these so-called primitive formations do not work
under the regime of labor which is a very special regime of activity. Last year, we tried to clarify
this. For lack of anything better, we had found the expression of "continuous action" or "activity
in continuous variation" which we opposed to the activity of the labor type.
But, in fact, it seemed to us and it will be better ... it will be better to explain it, perhaps today, it
seemed to us that, in any case, that labor was not a naturally determined activity, but was a very
special determination of activity, a model to which one subjected activity, and this “one” seemed
to us once again the State apparatus, namely, it is the State apparatus that subjects activity to the
"labor" model. So, there is no question of invoking a labor-time that would serve as a possible
comparison criterion between exchange ... between objects exchanged at the level of a so-called
primitive exchange.
So, you see, I am continuing my completely abstract hypothesis. And so there arose, to help us, a
hypothesis which I must say right away, it is curious that it occurs to us here. I was saying, well
yes, there are economists who have said: value cannot be explained either by labor or the labortime necessary for the production of the object, nor by the utility of the object… -- so you see
they are opposed both to use-value and labor-value -- and they state this mysterious expression:
value refers to the utility of the last object.
So, I say right away: what is curious is that this thesis -- the last object being the marginal object
-- is well known in political economy under the name of “marginalism” or “neoclassicism”. and
that this theory had and still retains a fundamental importance.5 I am saying that it was obviously
designed to take account of capitalism and capitalist market. But theories have adventures…
like… like everything. It would not be improbable that, for example, a theory invented for a
particular sector to account for certain phenomena of the capitalist market, notably of the balance

                                                                                                        7

of prices under a capitalist regime, shifts direction and is discovered to have a field of application
in non-capitalist formations. So, we can always ask this question: does the marginal object, the
idea of the last object, not find a ... a very curious application in so-called primitive formations?
Won't that help us? That’s my question, in our hypothesis.
I'm quoting a ... text from a textbook, not at all by a great economist, from a textbook that
explains marginalism. I will read slowly, ok? It’s a question ... this time, it’s a question of labor
and productivity, not about the product; it is a question of the productivity of labor and the
worker. And this is what the author says: "Let it be a sheep farmer ..." -- see, it's quite simple, the
example must be very clear, right? -- "Let it be a sheep farmer who wonders if his team of
shepherds is sufficient. He can see that if he hired one more shepherd (without making any
change in his tools or in his constructions)” -- he puts that in parentheses; I’m emphasizing it,
right, emphasizing it for the future, for my future. – Take a close look at the conditions: you have
the entrepreneur, right, the entrepreneur-breeder who tells himself: do I have enough shepherds?
This is the question. And he tells himself: maybe I could hire, that is, pay one more shepherd
without making any change in my tools or in my constructions. We should add: neither in my
lands -- you are aware that a sheep is so many… I don't know, a cow is an acre, a sheep is…, I
don't know ... uh ... but the land area is also supposed to stay the same. – So, without making any
changes, can he take on one more shepherd? This is a question that all ... To understand, you
have to put yourself ... uh ... all that we will have to say, later, about capitalism, you always have
to put yourself in the place of a boss. So ... there you go, the sheep boss, ok? Do I hire one more
person, once it’s said that this is a matter of not changing anything in your business?
Sense that we already have something. I would really like to go slowly today and have you
follow me… very closely and… uh…. A notion of threshold begins to emerge. All bosses know
that; all bosses say that. There is even a famous rule which is something like the rule of fifty.
There is always a threshold in a business. Bosses know very well that, beyond a certain
threshold, the structure of the company must be changed. For example, there is a threshold at
which if you hire one more person, you, as the boss, have a labor council on your back. You will
tell me: this does not matter, it's okay ... Yes, no, uh ... Fine ... uh ... There are also thresholds in
which the accounting can no longer be done the same way. You have to change, I would say…
[He does not complete this] There are thresholds beyond which the whole assemblage has to
change. So, notice that my sheep boss, there, he is asking himself: can I hire one more shepherd
without changing my assemblage, that is, without increasing my property, without changing the
constructions, etc.? See the problem?
I’ll continue. "He can see that if he hired one more shepherd without making any change, the
flock would be better looked after, the number of lambs could be increased, and they would be
able" - that is, he would -- "he would in this way be able to send twenty more sheep to market
every year." Let us suppose he realizes this: without changing the assemblage of my business, if
I hire one more guy, I can have twenty more little lambs to send to the market. You see, right?
You follow me? If you don't understand, you won't understand the other examples ... it's not ...
So up to this point, it's okay.

                                                                                                         8

"The net product", the net product "of this additional shepherd’s labor will therefore be in the
quantity of twenty sheep". And, right, since with the additional shepherd, the guy, without
changing anything, can have twenty more little sheep, the net product of this shepherd’s labor
will therefore be, in quantity, twenty sheep, and in value, and in value, what the price these
twenty sheep will be worth at market. This is all crystal clear. "If the breeder can hire the
additional shepherd for a salary that is somewhat lower" -- that is, a somewhat lower than the
price of twenty, the price of twenty sheep minus x -- "If the breeder can hire the additional
shepherd for a lower price, a salary even slightly lower than the price of the twenty sheep, he
will. Otherwise, he will refrain from hiring him." These are… these are basic rules for a business
operation.
"This shepherd we're about to hire ..." -- You see, right? -- "This shepherd we're about to hire ..."
It starts ... the text starts to get interesting here, right? There, in the boss’s head, he is evaluating.
He’s evaluating: can I hire a guy? Is he going ... uh ... is he going to earn twenty sheep for me?
Can I pay him a little less or a lot less than the price of the twenty sheep at the market rate? --
"This shepherd that we are about to hire is the marginal shepherd, he is the borderline (limite)
shepherd.” Notice why he is marginal or borderline: because, if this last shepherd is hired, and if
we hired another shepherd ... another shepherd after the first one, then the assemblage would
have to change. This is why the parenthesis is essential. This is the borderline shepherd, given
the assemblage being considered. The guy can always hire more shepherds; at that point, he will
need new land, new constructions; he will have to change the nature of his operating assemblage,
the nature of the business. So, understand, here we are at a last shepherd in the sense of: the last
one before the assemblage is forced to change, the last one before the assemblage is forced to
change. This will be called "the marginal" or "the borderline object" or "the borderline
character". -- Fine, is this OK? You stop me, huh, if this isn’t working -- He will receive a salary
approximately equal to the net value he adds to the total product, that is, less than the twenty
sheep he brings in, less to a determined extent. [Pause] Uuuhh, there you go.
But if we assume that all the shepherds in the operation, this one, the marginal shepherd -- this is
a beautiful notion, the marginal shepherd, the morning shepherd, it's curious, that ... [He does not
finish this] Okay then, uh, this must already, you sense that we are going to come, that we are
going to come back to our problems that I mentioned the last time, more concrete ones there: the
café, the last drink. But I tell myself, the worker of the last hour, we will ... we will have to go
and see, will have to return to this parable, there, of the worker of the last hour and see if, not at
all if this is marginalism -- that's not how we work -- but if there is a way to make, not at all an
assimilation between a text uh ... of the New Testament and a text of political economy, that
would be of no interest, but if we cannot jump from one to the other, to create ruptures that will
enrich this notion of “last” ... --
But finally, there you have it. If we assume that all the shepherds of the operation, this one and
those who had been hired previously -- that is, the whole series, the whole series of successively
hired shepherds all the way to the marginal shepherd -- if we assume that all the shepherds of the
operation, that one and those who had been hired previously, are interchangeable, that is, if we
do not allow ourselves the hypothesis of a magic shepherd (berger génie), if they are

                                                                                                             9

interchangeable, we must think that all will necessarily receive the same salary. Notice what this
means: if you’ve understood this phrase "everyone will necessarily get the same salary", that's
great. He's telling us ... And by what right can he tell us that? He is telling us: The salary of
previously hired shepherds depends on the evaluation of the salary of the marginal shepherd.
So, you will tell me: but the marginal shepherd is not yet hired. Obviously, he's not yet hired.
Across the entire series, the entire series is determined by the businessman’s evaluation of the
marginal shepherd's salary. And the salary of the shepherds, of the previous shepherds, across the
whole series, will be determined by the salary of the last of the possible shepherds. Once again,
how can I say [Deleuze coughs and chokes] "the last possible object"? I can say this because I
am calling "the last possible object" ..., uh, no, "the last possible shepherd", the last shepherd
before the assemblage is forced to change. One more shepherd, besides the last shepherd, the
assemblage is no longer possible; another assemblage is required. Therefore, it is the evaluation
of the marginal shepherd's salary that determines the salary for all existing shepherds. Do you
understand? Fine.
It's no wonder that it was the English who had these ideas; it's very, very ... it's very ... it's very
funny. And, therefore, this author who only summarizes the marginalist theses can conclude, this
is what interests me: "the productivity of the marginal worker ..." -- namely his power over
twenty little sheep -- "the productivity of the marginal worker thus determines not only that
worker’s wages" -- quite simply - "but that of all the others." Fine. There, we chose the problem
of productivity and wages. And he adds in brackets: "In the same way that, when it was a
question of commodities ..." -- and undoubtedly, at the level of the commodities, this is even
clearer; I therefore chose a more difficult case, so, if you understand it, you understand this all
the more for commodities. "In the same way that, when it was a question of commodities, the
utility of the last bucket of water ...", "the utility of the last bucket of water or the last sack of
wheat governed the value not only of that bucket or that sack but of all the other buckets or all
the other sacks making up the stockpile.” We’ll cross out the last bit: "making up the stockpile"
[inaudible word], since it doesn't fit, it doesn't change a thing. "The value of all buckets of water
and of all sacks of wheat is governed by the marginal object, that is, by the determining value of
the last bucket of water and the last sack of wheat."6
You will tell me: in that case, we vaguely understood what “the last” was in the case of the
shepherd, but we understand more, perhaps, in the case of the bucket of water and ... [Deleuze
does not finish] Well, if we have already understood about the shepherd and we see that the
marginalists began by undertaking their analysis not at the level of productivity and labor, but at
the level of the commodity, so it's the utility of the last object that determines the value of the
whole series -- that's it, if I sum up, right? It's the utility of the last object that will determine the
value of the whole series and of each term in the series. If we say that, we tell ourselves: well,
we’ve got hold, we’ve got hold of a start.
What can…? And, in fact, we have a break, and so, we tell ourselves, we have to catch our ...
breath; let’s forget, let’s forget about marginalism, or let’s pretend to forget it. And we say: the
topic, this marginal thing, is really odd. The last one determines the value of the whole series.

                                                                                                   10

What can I say about that? That, in fact, it needs to be corrected: it’s the idea of the last one. The
idea of the last one determines the value of the whole real series, of the whole series of real
terms. Why? Because we saw it quite well, and there it was clear in the example of the shepherd.
It is not when the last shepherd, the marginal shepherd, is actually hired that he will become a
determining factor of the salary, it is the salary of all the previous shepherds actually hired which
is determined by the idea of the marginal shepherd’s productivity, that is, of the last shepherd
that can be hired without causing the assemblage to change.
In other words, there we already have something that matters to me enormously, it is… I will
then formulate my hypothesis more precisely: there would be collective evaluations… -- we are
in the middle of the social field, in the middle of… in the midst of collective formation -- there
would be collective evaluations which would be of an anticipatory nature. What would they
anticipate? They would anticipate the limit. -- There we… we… we progress suddenly; we
progress in leaps and bounds, even if it's abstract. -- They anticipate the limit. They anticipate the
number of terms necessary to reach this limit, and they anticipate the time taken to reach this
limit. Fine. [Pause]
Why is this collective evaluation anticipatory? After all, it is a philosophical subject that matters
to you; well, even from the point of view of the history of philosophy, I am quoting for the
record a very beautiful text by Kant that some of you know, on the anticipations of perception.
And, in this text, Kant tries to show that perception has a structure such that it comprises at least
... – perception being entirely related to experience, one perceives only something which is given
in experience, otherwise we imagine (on conçoit), we do not perceive -- well, that there is
nevertheless a given that Kant calls a priori, that is, independent of experience, which intervenes
in perception, only one. And it is this datum that constitutes the anticipation of perception. And
this datum is that whatever it is, perception necessarily has a quantity, an intensive magnitude.
Fine.
I am saying: maybe we encounter, on a whole different level, but maybe that… that, there too,
the intersection will be created between this problem of anticipation in judgment… and, there,
we grasp onto, really under a completely different aspect, we grasp onto a problem of
anticipation in collective evaluation. And we say: collective evaluation is… -- and at that point,
we will call it, even if it means then saying “oh no, we were wrong, that was only one case; there
are other collective evaluations ..." -- but for the moment, I can say: I will call "collective
evaluation" an evaluation which bears on the idea of a last object, of the marginal object, and
therefore, on the number of terms in the series in order to arrive at this last object and the time
necessary to arrive there. You see?
Why does that interest me? That interests me enormously since the other years, uh… I would
find something like a confirmation there, but which, in previous years, I could not think through
since… [Deleuze does not finish] In previous years, for example, we have not ceased to return
constantly to the notion of assemblage, very often. And I was trying to say: the assemblage, an
assemblage, which seems to me better than the notion of behavior – in the end, we assemble (on
agence), we do not behave --, and well… it is very different, as a notion, at the same time, and

                                                                                                    11

well, I was trying to say: an assemblage always has two sides. It has like, very roughly, it has one
side, and these two sides, one does not depend on the other; they are in reciprocal presupposition.
Fine, every assemblage has a physical aspect or even, one should say, to harden the word,
physicalist aspect, and it has a semiotic or semiological aspect. That is, it is both a machinic
assemblage and an assemblage of enunciation. Why am I going through this parenthesis?
Because, there, I have a very ... [He does not finish] And these two aspects are not at all
symmetrical, they do not correspond at all term to term. In any assemblage, you will find a
system of wording and statements, and you will find a system of things and mixing of things.7
And there, in the primitive assemblage, where ... that I'm dealing with right now, what do I find?
I indeed find the aspect, how to say, a physical, physicalist "thing" (‘chose’ physique, physicale)
namely the series of men, shepherds, or objects ... [Interruption of the recording] [46: 20]

Part 2
In this case, what would I call the “speaking system (système d’énonciation) of the assemblage”?
Precisely the aggregate of collective evaluations bearing on the ... idea of the last object. And
don't wait for the last object to be there. You do not wait…. The boss does not wait to hire the
last possible shepherd so that his evaluation of the last shepherd’s productivity determines the
actual wages of all the actual shepherds. Right? Fine. Well, this is it, this is the collective
evaluation. [Pause]
And there, I am indeed bringing up a problem. What problem am I bringing up? Because,
compared to the outline of the theory of labor-value, here I ... this will become more concrete in
a little while, ok? ... You have to put up with me ... You have to ... Compared to the theory of
labor-value, notice that there is a common problem with which political economy -- and this is
even what makes it interesting in my opinion from the point of view of a theory of statements or
a theory of utterance -- political economy inevitably encounters this problem, whatever its
conception of value might be, namely: how is the evaluation of the means of exchange or the
criterion of exchange established? There has to be a collective assessment. I would say that a
fundamental and insufficiently outlined chapter of political economy is: whatever school to
which one refers, it is that it [the school] necessarily includes a theory of collective evaluations
which I would also call "a theory of the anticipation of social perceptions".
Fine. Uh ... So that would work just fine, because in fact, the advocates of labor-value, what are
they telling us? They assume that the means of exchange for objects refer to the so-called
socially necessary labor-time to produce objects. You see, this is an extremely clear thesis. Once
again, there, to credit ... to credit Marx with this thesis is nonsense, not that Marx does not accept
it, but Marx does not claim to invent it; on the contrary, it is the most classic old theory of
classical political economy. Marx’s innovation is quite profound, but, precisely, it is not there,
right? Good.
We are told: if there is therefore an exchange of objects, it is because there is indeed a way to
compare the objects exchanged, you see, in the theory of labor-value. And this way to compare
the objects exchanged is to compare the socially necessary labor-time for the production of

                                                                                                         12

object A and object B. I assume that object A takes double the time; it will be worth two objects
B. Okay, very simple. You see that the theory of labor-value nonetheless implies …, we do not
assume that these societies have, for example, systems or even a state of labor which is
mechanized labor. [Pause] Now, if we do not assume a so-called scientific, pseudo-scientific
mechanization and quantification of labor, the socially necessary working time immediately
implies and refers to a collective evaluation of both the worker and the entrepreneur and the
collectivity itself. Ah yes, that takes ... Uh ... you use ... with a steel ax ... uh ... they are not going
to take measurements anyway ... With a steel ax, you do twice as much ... or three times more
work than with an iron ax ... This is a collective evaluation which relates to labor-time. It
assumes the labor regime. Fine.
For reasons that we have seen and others that we will see – once again, I cannot say everything at
the same time -- we have deprived ourselves of this possibility in the case of so-called primitive
exchanges, that we called by convention primitives, since we are saying: in this, there is no
socially necessary labor-time since the activity there is in continuous variation, therefore there is
absolutely nothing that corresponds to labor-time. However… However, here I am quoting for
the record, so that…, out of a concern…, of course, I know that there are certain ethnologists
who have tried to apply criteria, even very quantitative criteria, of labor-time to primitive
societies. It's very odd that even those say that it has no correspondence in the group
consciousness, that it has no equivalent. We can always apply it, but ... Fine, I am thinking of an
Australian who developed much of this kind of research, saying: well yes, but… it does indeed
work; it works, it is true, but there it is, it does not matter. For reasons that I have tried to state or
suggest, we cannot think that collective evaluation has a bearing on labor-time.
Moreover, one of the most developed texts in this respect is found in Engels, in Engels, the
preface that Engels wrote for Book III of Capital, Book III of Capital, which is not published by
Marx himself, is published by Engels, and Engels appends a preface to it. And, in this preface, is,
I believe, one of the most precise texts in which Engels says: once it’s given, once labor-value is
stated, how in a very primitive society can the evaluation of labor-time occur since he is an
advocate of a labor-value theory? And his answer states that, well yes, there is a kind of
collective evaluation in the mode of anticipation… -- this is a very curious text; well, those who
are interested, you will look it up; I will pass it around at the end of the session -- he adds:
otherwise, those involved in exchange would not meet their expenses. Grant me… uh… I'm sure
you've understood all this, why should that last sentence, "otherwise, those involved in exchange
would not meet their expenses” put us into a state of joy that I am not adequately expressing?
[Laughter] That's because, maybe, you will surely feel this, but it comes close to something,
specifically he is in the process of reintroducing a marginalist criterion.
If we try to comment on "otherwise, those involved in exchange would not meet their expenses",
how can we define the cost recovery independently from the reference to any other type of
evaluation? Won’t the respective assessment of costs not allude ...? [He does not complete this]
In any case, notice in what state we find ourselves: we are saying, in certain cases, namely where
there is no State apparatus, in so-called primitive groups, we made a big leap; we were right to
talk about an anticipation mechanism, because it works, in fact, in the form of anticipation. There

                                                                                                       13

is an anticipatory collective evaluation. And we specify: what does this anticipatory collective
evaluation consist of? And we answer: this anticipatory collective evaluation consists in this, that
it anticipates the limiting idea of the last object or of the last producer and fixes the value of all
the terms of the series and the time necessary to exhaust the series -- implied without the
assemblage changing -- and fixes it according to the idea of the last object.
So, we answer, no! Not necessary! The collective assessment does not have to have a bearing on
labor-time. Collective evaluation may well have a bearing on the idea of the limit object or
marginal object. You see? Confirmation, like the confirmation of rest. -- I am sensing that, in a
little while, we are going to take a break because ... You tell me if you can take more because ... I
mean, that bothers me ... For me, I find this fun… Fine, this, this puts me in a great state of joy,
but for you, it is not necessarily the same thing. Uh ... And sometimes we can talk about things
that bore me fully and that are fun for you, you never know. That’s how we should distribute
UVs [academic credits]; I’d ask "who’s having fun with this?" Anyone who would say that
they’re having fun, well ... [Laughter]
A student: [Inaudible] … accelerate growth without changing the structure.
Deleuze: That’s it, that’s it, that’s it. of course. I'll summarize what he’s saying, ok?
The student: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Absolutely, absolutely, the bottom lines are completely ... Yes, yes,
he’s pointing out that, in fact, in any company, precisely what is called accounting operations
and. in particular, the exercise of the balance sheet, the preparation of the balance sheet precisely
relies on this whole system which implies and which is always created as a function of a
threshold beyond which the entire company would have to change its structure, in particular the
global payroll, I suppose, what we call the global payroll. Here I think there is someone here who
would in any case be much more knowledgeable than me to talk about this, uh…. There we are.
The student: What's important is that [Inaudible] in general accountancy [Inaudible] to accelerate
growth without increasing costs.
Deleuze: Yes, of course! Without changing, it's not so much to increase costs, it's worse than to
increasing costs ...
The student: It's time [Inaudible]
Deleuze: That's it.
The student: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: You are right. You are all the more correct since the importance here, indeed, of this
accounting, in fact, causes the factor of duration to intervene. There is the factor of numbers of
elements, the numbers of elements in the series; what we are doing is ... this is a theory of ... of
what we could call serial groups, but we would call that precisely, borrowing the expression
from Sartre, but giving it a completely different meaning. These are serial groups and serial
operations that cause a number of terms of the series to intervene, the limit object, idea of the

                                                                                                      14

limit object, and time required to [do something]. And, in fact, he is right to insist on the
temporal factor in accounting, to the point that one would imagine a thesis: the idea of time in
accounting, there yes, that would be a beautiful thesis ... It would, right? I think so, right? Uh ...
Certainly ..., but finally ... what would have a lot to say would have nothing to say, but that, it’s
true. Have you studied any accounting?
The student: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: You know what you're going to do, right? [Laughter] Well, what? This is ... Uh ...
Would you be ready [to present], here?
The student: Sure.
Deleuze: Would you be ready right away? That’s going to be great; I'm going to continue
presenting my concrete examples. If you even like to go next door to think a little bit, how just to
explain to us… -- because, there, that would interest me greatly -- to explain to us in about
fifteen minutes, I'll have someone find you… [Laughter] You could explain to us, precisely, the
time factor in accountancy, in business accounting. Could you do that?
The student: Yes, I can ...
Deleuze: Can you? So...
The student: Not right away; it would be better that way; I ... [Inaudible]
Deleuze: In my opinion, this is where you are inspired, this is where you [Inaudible words]
[Laughter] So precisely, or you cover your ears, you cover your ears, eh, you just don’t listen,
you ... re ... Or you go outside and ... uh ... so ... just to give yourself the time [to prepare].
So, we’ll forget that, ok, because it's ... it's just a thing ... I am saying, there's a second point.
Here, my first point was, you see, this collective evaluation which is, from the beginning, ah yes,
I am emphasizing this, because ... there is, for those who would like to extend this then in a
philosophical direction… you see the extent to which it is… -- this is good, we have an
accounting direction thanks to him -- I was thinking of a philosophical direction; we would have
to start again. Those who know Kant, Kant’s text, in my opinion, is completely wrong [inaudible
word] anticipation. In fact, if there is an intensive quantity of perception, that’s because social
perception is fundamentally serial and works as a function of the limit object… uh… but… So, it
is for another reason than the one that he believes ... Uh ... No, one shouldn’t say that: Kant is
never wrong, he guessed all that [inaudible words] ...
So, understand me ... What did I mean ...? Yes, there is… All marginalism has a completely
crazy theory because they're all crazy, really, all of them… uh… completely crazy; this is
precisely the theory of evaluation and trial and error. And you see that, in a way, if we pursue
this, it becomes quite funny since, here, the opposition between the proponents of labor-value
and the marginalists takes on a very, very concrete meaning. They both agree, once again, in
saying: there is a need ..., nothing would happen in the social field, neither productivity, nor
exchange of products, if there were no anticipatory mechanisms of collective evaluation.

                                                                                                     15

Good, that interests me a lot; it's not about planning, it's not about ... It's much more about
concrete things, much more general stuff in societies. Simply, the difference is that the advocates
of labor-value tell us: collective evaluation has a bearing on socially necessary labor-time. The
marginalists tell us: that’s not it at all! So, we are right to follow the marginalists on…, in certain
cases. I am saying: if it is true that, in certain cases, in certain social formations, you find
yourself faced with an activity regime of the “continuous variation” type and not at all of the
“labor” type, there is no collective evaluation of labor-time. And yet there is a collective
evaluation which will govern trading. Trading is still possible, because at that point, you have a
collective evaluation having a bearing on the idea of the limit object or the last object. But, once
again, this idea is there from the start of the series. In other words, it is an anticipatory evaluation
of the time required to reach the limit object of the series. But this evaluation occurs from the
first term of the series, it occurs from the beginning. In other words, it is much faster than the
time required to "get to," to the last term of the series. Moreover, it is necessarily faster than the
time required to go from term 1 to term 2 of the series.
Hence a very, very curious notion that some marginalists develop in what they call their theory
of evaluation or of trial and error. They developed the notion of infinite speed of adjustment, the
infinite speed of adjustment. So there, they conceive it…, they fight among themselves, because
there are several ways of conceiving of the infinite speed of adjustment, either in a single
operation, er…, it is a really differential operation in the sense of differential calculus. But it can
already be conceived in the form of a kind of integration of differentials; that is, there would be
several operations which would occur in an extremely rapid time, there would be an op… a
summation of these operations; or there would be only one operation, well…, This is very
important…, This would be very… And they develop diagrams, then, pseudo-mathematical ones
very, very, very…, very creative, very interesting, very funny ...
The previous student: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: That's it, that's it. That's it. And now, so, no doubt, with uh ... with everything we've
done ... what's that called? Uh… the terminal, with the distances of the… factors… of the
terminal factor, there would be equivalences of infinite speeds of adjustment. The stock market
currently must function... well ... he ... he will be saying that later. See what horizons that opens
up for us. [Laughter]
So, the time of ... I am saying: a second point. And, there, we have a first point which, already,
opens lots of research for us on ... Second point, and well, it seems obvious to me that, in all this,
it seems that we are playing ... -- and, if you have something that you did not quite understand, it
is only for this reason, it is not your fault -- we are playing on the word “last” and that, in fact,
there are two of them, two “lasts”. The “last” has two very, very different meanings. There we
are.
So, suddenly, I'm going back to my example, because it's obvious ... let's forget about the
marginalists before going back to it. In that way, we will have three points, right? These will be...
We created, little a, we start, little b, we forget everything. And I go back to my seemingly
simple examples like that, but not easier than anything else. I mean…, I was saying: let's take the

                                                                                                      16

word “last” literally. What is the last drink? At the cafe, it's an assemblage. The “men at the
cafe” assemblage. What time is it?
A student: Twenty-five to twelve.
Deleuze: Twenty-five to twelve already? Uh ... well, men at the cafe, this is an assemblage. Or
else, I said: a domestic drama, at first glance, that seems an event, in that way. No, it is an
assemblage, to see the way in which, in certain households, it is repeated, and it fulfills a very
specific social function. We have a fight, right; if we don’t have our fight, something is wrong.
So, I am saying, at that point, it's even more of a habit, really, it's truly a functional assemblage. I
will stick to these two examples; we can multiply them. Either ... Either I am quoting for the
record, because I ... I would very much need it later, the last violence. Okay, I've got: the last
drink in the cafe assemblage. See, I am looking for examples, but you should find others, but in
other areas. The last drink in the café assemblage, the last word in the domestic drama…
A student: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: The last bonus trick in belote, in a game, yes, there, that's a very complex case, yes ...
And then ... uh ... the last violence, which we will leave aside, it’s later on that we’ll need it.
Well then, well then ... I’ll say right away: what's going on? When the men are at the cafe -- I'm
trying to recount ... to tell the uh ... common story, a common story -- they're at the cafe. Each of
them asks uh… he orders, uh… a drink. There are four of them, let's say. [Pause] Okay, I am
saying, don't you get a sense that there is something strange? I assume that this very marginalist,
that, in fact, the number of terms, that is, the number of drinks and the length of time they stay at
the cafe, of course, is subject to all kinds of factors: the need to get home not too late, right?…
uh… economic constraints, money… fine, whatever you want… But among all these factors, is
there not one series of marginalist type, namely that the value of all drinks is determined by the
idea of the marginal drink, the last drink, so much so that it's in order to reach -- like in a
finalized series - it's in order to reach the last one that all the others are drunk?
What does it mean? [Laughter] So, why don't they start with the last one? [Laughter] That’s
absurd, because not only can they not start with the last one, but they cannot even hurry along the
time which is the object of a collective evaluation. And whoever wants to hurry along the time
will be laughed at. Likewise -- to say how good people are and are not alcoholics no matter what
some say --- the one who wants to lengthen their time excessively will be despised and treated
like an alcoholic. There is a kind of collective evaluation, fine; there, we have a number of drinks
which is often distributed according to the number of people, that is, each one has his round.
And, I am saying: the value of each drink is determined by the idea of the limit object, that is, the
marginal glass.
And what does "the last drink" mean? What meaning do we give to: "Come on, the last drink" ...
all that? Here too, these are problems of collective evaluation. The last drink is the last one
before [Pause] the assemblage is forced to change. If you go past that limit, it can no longer be
the same assemblage. What does that mean? If we go past that limit, then there is still another

                                                                                                        17

last one then, there is a last one after the last one, again, there is a last one after the last one. The
last one after the last one is the one that would involve a different assemblage.
What other assemblage in this specific case? I can imagine several. Let's start over. Let's start
again to be clear. So, the marginal last one, the one that marks the limit ..., what does that mean,
the limit? It means everyone has had enough. It means, we stop drinking, finished, right? This
society, this social formation there, the guys in the cafe… well, that's it for today. What does that
mean? “See you tomorrow, see you guys tomorrow." What does that mean? Literally, to go
faster, I am saying: you have to recover, right, you have to stop drinking to be able to drink
again. You have to stop drinking to be able to drink again, that marks what? It marks the
necessary break between two sets of the same assemblage. It marks the necessary break between
two exercises of assemblage. -- I hope in accountancy, he has found us [inaudible words] to
match. -- The necessary break between two exercises of the same assemblage and marked by the
marginal object.
Good. So up to there, it’s fine. I would add: this is why ... this is why, in a way, you recognize
alcoholism in that alcoholics are people who keep continuously stop drinking, right?8 [Laughter]
These are not people who drink all the time. Just as you only encounter drug addicts in the
process of detoxification, you only meet alcoholics who are stopping their drinking. The "I’m
quitting my drinking, quitting my drinking" is strictly a part of alcoholism. You will tell me:
what isn’t a part of it? We'll see. So, good. So, these are series that are like so many assemblage
exercises, the assemblage remaining the same and, each time, the marginal object arrive at the
end.
You will tell me: but the marginal object of each series can change. Yes, there are phenomena in
the history of the speed of adjustment; there may be an intensification of the marginal object
within the same assemblage, but see if, on the sly, already, the assemblage is not in the process
of changing. From here, I turn to the other aspect of my problem: what would the change of
assemblage be? I can say just anything. There is a threshold; and here as well, alcoholics are…
they're not idiots, eh, they're very, very… very sensitive to thresholds. In this way, I am saying:
fine, a threshold… where they only have a feeling that… they might not survive (tenir). We
would have to jump into another assemblage. What then? Or else, to change the nature of the
drinks, we also see that in the collective evaluation of drugs. A threshold is reached, and we say
to ourselves: ah, we're going to have to change the assemblage, the “drug” assemblage; we're
going to have to move on from grass to something else. It happens. It is indeed a problem of
evaluating thresholds and limits. And then ... or else, to change the nature of the drinks or change
the assemblage, that is, the composition of the assemblage: not the nature of the drinks, but the
people with whom you drink. They won't be able to be the same anymore; we'll have to change
the assemblage, we'll spend it with real alcoholics, we won't spend it… it won't be with friends
after work, it will be something else. Fine. Here as well, there is a kind of evaluation.
Or else, we feel quite well: ah well, if… if I go too far, there, it's… I still am risking something,
it's… this will be a particularly terrible assemblage, it will be the hospital assemblage, the
“hospital” assemblage. This is an assemblage, the "hospital" assemblage, it is an assemblage. I

                                                                                                     18

am saying that, there, we will have reached the threshold because the limit will have been
crossed. Having crossed the limit defined by the marginal object, it is necessary to change the
assemblage in one way or another, by inventing another… another “alcohol” assemblage or else
by entering into a “hospital” assemblage … -- I don't mean that this is necessarily a “hospital”
assemblage … -- or else, or else, or else… depending on the inventiveness of the assemblage,
there are so many assemblages.9
Likewise, with my story of ... I can say ... so, I can go really fast here, because this is exactly the
same in my story of a domestic drama. The domestic drama works, right, like an assemblage. It
works through series. Each series or each exercise of assemblage, I would say, is strictly
determined by the collective evaluation, that is, the oddly common, vaguely common evaluation
that both partners make, if the assemblage is a couple -- therefore, the collective evaluation is the
assemblage of the two partners -- that the two partners make concerning what? The idea of the
last word, the idea of the last word, the marginal word, the limit word. It may not always be the
same, but it would be defined by a certain weight or a certain color. Fine. There is also a
collective evaluation of how long it takes to get to that word and what other words through
which one has to pass. I would say: the value of the other words and the value of time ... [Pause]
and the amount of time it takes to reach, ... etc., is determined by the collective evaluation of the
marginal word. It is the limit object, in this case.
Suppose they go beyond it [the word]: here, something has gone wrong. All of a sudden, there's
one of the two saying something they shouldn’t. We can imagine it; this happens all the time in
domestic dramas. Once again, when you're the bewildered spectator, you're like, “Well look out,
they can't go any farther than that”. [Laughter]. And then there is one of them who suddenly
speaks a word that, to you, seems quite restrained, and that is the one that is not acceptable. It has
gone past the limit. It has gone past the ... Yeah. It went past ..., precisely, it left behind the kind
of agreement implied by collective evaluation. At that point, the whole assemblage changes,
namely, we enter the “divorce” assemblage, the “separation” assemblage, this is another
assemblage. It's no longer the couple assemblage; it's another assemblage, right?
Good, so what am I saying? I'm saying that “last” in the sense of marginal, does not mean
“ultimate”; it actually means "second to last", since in fact, the last in the sense of "ultimate" is
the one starting from which the assemblage is forced to change. “Last” in the sense of "ultimate"
or the one starting from which the assemblage is forced to change, this is what I will call "the
threshold". So why not reserve the word “last” for that one? We’re indeed forced to reserve the
word "last" for that one since it is the first. It’s the first of the other assemblage. Good.
On the other hand, the last in the sense of limit and no longer threshold, no longer “threshold of
new assemblage”, but “limit of the previous assemblage”, the last in the sense of limit, this is the
marginal object. This is the second to last. French has a word that comes from Latin and which
clearly distinguishes the second to last or the last in the sense of second to last, from the ultimate,
it is the word “penultimate”. Penultimate is literally the almost last, or the last before the last.
The marginal object is the penultimate or the limit. Beyond the marginal object, there is

                                                                                                    19

something else, the threshold once again. Beyond the limit object, there is the threshold starting
from which another assemblage begins.
Hence, I can answer the question: in such a formation, what is anticipated, what is warded off?
What are these anticipation-conjuration mechanisms that I attached so much importance to the
last time? The answer now becomes, it seems to me, crystal clear, uh… water, uh… obvious: in
the collective evaluation, what is anticipated is fundamentally the limit; what is warded off is
fundamentally the threshold. [Pause] And the collective evaluation indissolubly unites
anticipation and conjuration, and cannot anticipate the limit without conjuring the threshold, nor
conjure the threshold without anticipating the limit.
Hence: how does it work ... -- I have only to apply this, and I have finished my problem anyway.
Uh… -- Let’s suppose, then, an abstract mode -- I really insist on abstract – abstract mode of
primitive exchange. This is what is happening. I take two groups, a group of pickers, who collect
wild seeds. Do you remember? I am sticking to my conditions, right, I'm not giving myself a
farmer's group. For I don't know if you sense this: farming is incapable of fitting into these series
outlines. If you sense that, you've understood everything. Why can't farming fit into these serial
outlines, why does it necessarily refer to a State apparatus? We will see that much later, later, but
you must already feel it.
So, in any case, I'm not reflecting on that; I'm telling myself: here is my little group of gatherers,
they are picking wild seeds, this is not farming. The others are not metalworkers, but they make
axes, they make axes. You have group A; I would say no more than A, pickers, and B, ax
makers. The best axes were made from obsidian before metallurgy, for example, right? Obsidian,
I think it's a kind of volcanic rock with which you get very ... very excellent edges. And then,
that's a nice word. Well, I am saying: [in] the primitive exchange, no need to compare the labortimes, no need to ask oneself what the labor-time is in order to gather, what the labor-time is in
order to make the obsidian ax, and then compare both. How do you expect that to be possible?
Here, I select an example that fits perfectly. And these two groups don't even speak the same
language, well, what do you want them to compare? Moreover, gathering is a typical activity
with continuous variation. For example, women go gathering, and then they sing, and then they
chat, and then they gather some more. This is called an "activity with continuous variation".
There is no ... there is no measurement of labor-time. For the ax maker, he's not going to
compare. It’s even an idea that would make the ... the primitives laugh, comparing the time taken
to gather wild seeds and the time taken to make an ax ... Well, sense this then, how are they
going to create the exchange?
On the other hand, they have a collective evaluation. We assume that it cannot be related to
labor-time which would even presuppose a common language that they do not have. I assume
that they're even two rather distant tribes, not of the same cultural background, not sharing the
same language. Fine. They exchange seeds for axes. I am saying: how can the exchange take
place? Well, we know that now. We know it. We know it. Uh ... [Pause] The question of
whether anyone ever used this method to exchange anything is another question. But I think,
yeah, I think people acted like that all the time.

                                                                                                   20

Group A, you remember, eh, in your head, group A must be the one that offers seeds and
receives axes. I say, in parenthesis, that it is too obvious after all I have said: marginalism is a
primacy of the law of demand over the law of exchange. I'm not saying why, but you [inaudible
words, Deleuze lowers his voice]. Well, group A that gets axes may develop -- I say “may”, this
is all abstract, eh; you cannot make the slight reflection to me about [inaudible word] -- Uh…
group A may develop an idea about the last quantity of axes that would force them to change
their assemblage. And the group may have [this idea] from the start, the collective evaluation of
the last quantity of axes that would force it to modify the structure of its gathering assemblage.
What does that mean? So, I’m continuing, eh, I’m continuing in the abstract. Group B can make
a collective assessment of the last quantity of seeds which would force it to modify its own
assemblage. If you grant me that, you grant me everything. I would say, at that point, that the
value of the traded items is strictly determined by the two limit objects for each group
respectively, the marginal ax for the group that gives wild seeds, the marginal seed for the group
that gives axes. And if the last ax ... And then the law of exchange will be ... [Pause] -- Ah that's
very simple; it’s the lack of words -- the law of exchange will be : [Pause] the last ax, that is,
which forces the I-don’t-remember-which group to change their assemblage… which would
force the group… beyond which, rather, beyond which the group would be forced to change its
assemblage, equal to the quantity of seeds that would force…, beyond which the other group
would be forced to change its own assemblage.
You see? This is a great market. You can't go wrong with this system. Why? Because: what’s
valuable here? There is never a direct comparison; this is an indirect exchange. Each group
evaluates respectively on its own behalf the value of its marginal object, [Pause] and it is this
respective evaluation by each group of the value for each of the marginal object relative to each
one that will determine the exchange. In other words, the objective relation in the exchange
arises from two subjective series; the direct relation arises from the indirect relation or, if you
prefer, the equalization in the exchange arises from two unequal, non-symmetrical processes.
But I’m just adding ... you’ll tell me: this is a little confusing, how do they evaluate? What does
that mean, “they would be forced to change their assemblage”? Well, let's reconsider the group --
and I’ll finish up with this -- let's reconsider the group of people receiving axes. Beyond the
marginal ax, either they have nothing to do with it, they keep the same assemblage, but they have
no concerns about the last ax, they have no need to use it. So, the exchange loses all interest.
This doesn't happen anymore. This is the moment time for the break before another series begins
again, the axes having worn out. This is exactly the moment for a break at the café. Or are they
forced to change their assemblage, so what would that mean? Giving up their itinerance; giving
up their gathering itinerance; creating with the threshold-axes – no longer the limit-ax that itself
belonged to the “gathering” assemblage – but creating what with the ultimate ax, with the
threshold ax? From brush clearing or worse, from stump removal, they become farmers. They
could no longer follow the flow of gathering; they would switch into a completely different type
of assemblage which, at least, would already involve agricultural elements. So, they ward off the
agricultural threshold by anticipating the “gathering” limit. Same reasoning for axes, not

                                                                                                                   21

difficult, namely that beyond the subsistence seeds necessary for their livelihood, the ax makers
would have to change their assemblage.
All is fine; it is still the development for itself of each respective series that will fix the value of
the exchange, the value of the object exchanged starting from what functions as the marginal
object in a series and from which this functions as marginal object in the other series. Proof of
which ... Proof of which ... it's uh ... it's just the last effort that I ask of you, this gives us a
confirmation, jumping from savages to things, to the most modern forms; this gives us a singular
confirmation concerning the time, the margin, the limit and the threshold, the accounting
exercise. [Deleuze indicates the student who he has asked to speak] You pick it up here ... you
pick it up here…
The previous student (who has just prepared a brief presentation): [Inaudible remarks]
Deleuze: Ah, ok, you aren’t picking it up here… And you should speak loudly… you should
speak as loudly as possible.
The student: [Inaudible presentation; some students say "Louder!"]
Deleuze: Okay! I would translate that, in my own language, by saying: the assemblage exercises,
the successive assemblage exercises, each, uh, primitive assemblage forms a series, and it recurs
after a pause, right? Er… Each series is therefore an assemblage exercise. It is obvious that the
assemblage exercises are variable. Right? No, what I want you to discuss very quickly, there, to
emphasize nonetheless, is your story uh ... the importance of time and of the evaluation of
duration in accounting. If necessary, if you can't hear, I'll repeat what he says, if he doesn't want
to speak loudly, right? ...
The student: [Continued inaudible presentation] [End of recording] [92:45]
Notes

  Besides the previous session, Deleuze discusses the relation city versus State throughout Plateau 13, “Apparatus of
Capture,” in A Thousand Plateaus.
  On Braudel and these points, see A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 431-435.
  Deleuze considers the anticipation-conjuration process in plateau 13 (on the apparatus of capture), A Thousand
Plateaus, pp. 435-437 (Mille plateaux, pp. 543-545).
  Beckett’s short story, “Premier amour” (1946) is translated “First Love”.
  Deleuze develops these same terms (e.g. utility, the “last”, marginalism, threshold) in section XII, “Capture”, in
plateau 13, A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 437-442 (Mille plateaux, pp. 545-550).
  In footnote 24 of Plateau 13, A Thousand Plateaus, p. 566, Deleuze attributes this quote (and provides its text) not
to an Englishman, but to Gaëton Picon, from Economie libérale et économie dirigée, vol. 1 (Paris: Sedes, 1946-47),
p. 117. After the text of this citation, Deleuze adds parenthetically: “Marginalism seeks to quantify the assemblage,
when in fact all kinds of qualitative factors are at work in the evaluation of the ‘last’.”
  Deleuze develops these two aspects of the assemblage in A Thousand Plateaus, plateau 5, “On Several Regimes of
Signs,” notably, pp. 140-145.
  Deleuze discusses his own alcoholism in this perspective in “B as in Boire [Drinking]”, in the video interview with
Claire Parnet from 1988-89, Gilles Deleuze, From A to Z [MIT/Semiotext(e), 2012).
  See also “D as in Desire” in Gilles Deleuze, From A to Z, for Deleuze’s moving account of being forced to deal
with student at Vincennes who has experienced the extreme threshold experience and requiring hospitalization.