1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Painting, 1981

Lecture 05, 12 May 1981

Transcriptions: Voix de Deleuze, Part 1, Cécile Lathullière (duration 52 :55); Part 2,
Guillaume Damry (duration 47:08); Part 3, Jean-Arnaud Filtness (duration 33 :51) ;
transcription revision and time stamp, Charles J. Stivale

Translated by Billy Dean Goehring

Part 1

… because our objective was to come up with a definition for analogical language. And again,
the terms of our problem are clear since it’s relatively easy for us to imagine the opposite of
analogical language: digital language, the language of code.

In fact, we ended up describing the language of code, or digital language, with the concept of
articulation. By “concept of articulation” Remember, at the end of our last session we said that
it’s a “concept” in the sense that it isn’t reducible to its physical or physiological
accompaniment. It isn’t reducible to the movements —”articulations” — that accompany digital
language or that rise to the level of speech acts. We tried to pin down the logical concept of
articulation in the simplest terms possible, so we said that articulation consists in the position of
meaningful units that are determinable insofar as these units can be determined in a series of
binary choices. And a finite set of meaningful units determinable by successive binary choices:
that seemed like it fit the description for “code.”

But analogical language… analogical language, as opposed to digital language or code, how
might we define that? Remember our first hypothesis: analogical language is the language of
likeness and is defined by likeness. Alright, it’s defined by likeness… Well, we shouldn’t say
that that’s insufficient, right. But at least that would let us… likeness allows us to effectively
define our first type of analogy. It’s what we called common analogy, or photographic analogy.
There, analogy is defined by conveying likeness. Whether a similarity in relation or a similarity
in quality. Right. All we could say… moreover… what… We shouldn’t be too hasty in giving up
this approach because it’ll be really important later on.

I’m saying, if I define the language of analogy, analogical language, as likeness, and in whatever
meanings this might be, likeness… in that case, what is the model for analogical language? What
will the model be for common analogy? I’d call it a pole: it’s one of the poles of analogy. The
model would be “the mold”, casting a mold. Imposing a likeness. All right.

And does molding essentially belong to analogical language? Perhaps. But what led us to say
that, even if that does constitute one dimension of analogical language, it doesn’t cover
everything about analogical language. Which… it seemed to me that, naturally, there’s always a
sort of likeness at work in analogical language. But that doesn’t mean that—it doesn’t prove that

                                                                                                       2

analogical language can be defined by likeness. When can analogical language be defined by
likeness? Only when likeness is the producer, when it’s what produces an image. And that’s
exactly what happens with molding.

But, on the other hand, there seemed to be many cases where analogy didn’t make use of
resemblance or productive likeness—rather, the likeness or resemblance was produced. The end
product of analogy. Thus, whenever resemblance is (and this is precisely what happens in
painting) whenever resemblance is the end product, the result of a process, the analogical process
cannot be defined by what it produces. Hence the necessity, even if we keep likeness-as-molding
as the first pole, the necessity of moving beyond—based on other forms of analogy—moving
beyond what was once relativistic. Hence the necessity, even if we keep likeness/molding as the
first pole, as the first pole of analogical language, the necessity of moving beyond—based on
other forms of analogy—moving beyond likeness as a criterion.

From there, we briefly considered a second criterion. The possibility of defining analogy by and
as, analogical language as a language of relations, a particular sort of relations, i.e., dependency
relationships between “the speaker” or “the broadcaster”, between a transmitter and a receiver,
between a speaker and a recipient. Between speaker and recipient. We had then come to a
different definition. What model did that refer to? We’ll look at that later on. And there, too,
even if there were a corresponding form of analogy, it didn’t exhaust the pole of analogy.

And finally, we reached a third analogical layer. Actually, it seemed like these dependency
relationships, inscribed into analogy, well… they had to refer to a particular form of expression.
And what was the form of expression for these dependency relationships? Well, we proposed a
third option for analogy. Here Rousseau came to the rescue: something more along the lines of
modulation. It’s up to us to develop a concept of modulation as rigorous as that of code, or that
of articulation.

What bearing does that have on our main problem? When it comes to aesthetic analogy,
modulation is the rule. More specifically, it’s at work whenever resemblance or likeness isn’t
what produces but what is produced, produced by other means. These “other means,” these nonresembling means that produce resemblance—means that bear no resemblance to the model and
that produce a resemblance—that’s what modulation is. Producing resemblance is what it means
to modulate. All right. That’s great because we have three forms of analogy: analogy via
likeness; analogy via relation, internal relation; analogy via modulation.

Well, we need… I don’t know… so let’s back up. Our concern is twofold: maintaining a
coherent concept, for all of these instances—a coherent concept of analogy covering all of these
instances, while also keeping all three fundamentally distinct. So, why do I want, these three
divisions, why do I want to come up with more identifiers? We’ll drop them if they don’t do
anything for us.

With the first form of analogy—as likeness or as conveying a likeness, as productive
resemblance—I’ll call a common or physical analogy. And while that doesn’t quite suffice, it’ll
work tentatively as a point of reference, for the time being…tentatively. I’ll call the second form
of analogy—as internal relations of dependency—you’ll see why I call that an organic analogy.

                                                                                                  3

And for now, let’s call analogy qua modulation—resemblance produced through completely
different means—aesthetic analogy.1

Let’s specify our terms even further. The model for the first form of analogy would be molding,
mold-casting. Casting a mold basically means having a resemblance, a likeness, imposed from
without. I might define it as a “surface operation.” I put a mold down onto some clay. I wait.
What am I waiting for? I’m waiting for the clay to even out under the mold’s impression. And
then I lift the mold away… it conveys a likeness. That totally demonstrates common analogy,
crude analogy. As molding. Anyway, look. It’s a surface operation. I emphasize this point
because I’m getting our concepts in order for later on. Yes, it operates on the edge. On the
surface. You could also call this type of analogy a superficial or skin-depth analogy.

If I make it a point to find a real-world example, would… -- see… because I need one, a little all
over the place; I’m attempting a sort of concretion around… I’m crystallizing it. Crystallization.
Crystals are known to be individuated in layers. They grow on the edges. What matters isn’t the
internal substance. The crystal is fundamentally… it’s a superficial development that grows on
the edges. So, what’s actually beyond the organic domain? What distinguishes organic
individuality from crystalline individuality? How do their laws differ? It might be really
important for our aesthetic categories later on.

How are organic laws and crystalline laws distinct? At the risk of confusing things -- so you see
that we haven’t left our essential problem -- what led certain critics to define Egyptian art by
“crystalline laws,” as opposed to Greek art, defined by “organic laws”? So, while it seems like it
isn’t relevant, it might be that we’re laying conceptual groundwork. But how does organic
depiction differ from molding? What is an organic depiction? Well, you can certainly tell that it’s
pretty different from crystallization. What is an organic reproduction?

Let me recall that I talked about this a completely different context, Buffon, the great Buffon,
developed a particularly daring concept, for his time, a concept so daring because it was so
philosophical.2 On the subject of natural history, Buffon says something along the lines of…
where you know -- it’s a shame, really, because he was mocked for it, even in the 18th century…
Buffon’s idea has been a laughingstock. And actually, it’s really beautiful; like all beautiful
ideas, it invites both criticism and irony -- Buffon says: see, reproduction… he thinks… it’s
fascinating; fascinating because it would require—so you understand what sort of problem it is—
it calls for a contradictory concept. And the wonderful, contradictory concept that Buffon
develops is what he calls an “internal mold.” A living thing reproduces not by molding
externally—it might be messy, but in rough terms I might say “by crystallizing”—but via an
internal mold.3

What makes the idea of an internal mold so strange? In effect, it’s a mold that doesn’t apply to
the surface. A mold that molds the inside, which sounds absolutely contradictory. What does it
mean to mold “the inside”? The only way a mold can reach inside is by making the interior into a
surface. Buffon goes so far as to say: “Internal mold” is as contradictory as if I said “thick
surface.” Wonderful. So, there is something beyond molds, beyond extrinsic molds… Can we
wrap our heads around the concept an intrinsic mold, an internal mold, or how it works? Look…
Buffon clarifies: “It would be a measure, but at the same time, it’s a measure that subsumes,

                                                                                                      4

contains diverse relationships between its parts. A measure that in itself incorporates a variety of
relationships, internal relationships.”

See, I’ve come back to the second sort of analogy. What might we call a measure with variable
times, a measure with different times? Well, let’s try something out. Isn’t that what you might
call a module? A module. Anyway. We’re just getting our terms in order. There is the mold and
then there is the module. It isn’t the same thing. Wouldn’t a module be something like an internal
mold? Right? [Pause] Well, yes, and then there would be modulation. Now I’ve got a series of
concepts. We can categorize analogy along three lines: mold, module, modulation. Great! Our
concept of modulation is starting to come into focus. We have sort of a progressive series:
molding, modeling, modulation.

Looking at either end of the series: what is the difference between a mold and a modulation?
What is the difference between molding and modulating? In his book on individuation,
Simondon explains the difference rather clearly. He says they’re “like two ends of the
spectrum.”4 To mold is to modulate permanently, definitively, establishing a balance and
imposing a form onto material… in molding it takes a certain amount of time for the material to
achieve the equilibrium imposed by the mold. And once it reaches this equilibrium, you turn out
the mold. So, you’ve modulated it for good. But on the flip-side, from the other end of the
sequence: if to mold is to modulate permanently… then modulating is molding—what sort of
molding? It’s a variable, temporary, and continuous mold. It’s molding continuously.

How so? Because modulation is like a mold that never stops changing. It reaches equilibrium
immediately, or almost immediately. Only it’s the mold that’s variable. Simondon’s text -- the
book is The Individual and Its Psycho-Biological Genesis -- page 41, it reads: “The difference
between the two cases, molding and modulating, resides in the fact that, with clay, the shaping
process is finite.” -- The shaping process is finite -- “In a few seconds it gradually finds a state of
equilibrium. Then the brick is unmolded. You use the state of equilibrium, unmolding the brick
when it reaches this state.” -- Here we go -- “With electronic tubes, however, one uses”— so
now we’re dealing with modulation -- “With electronic tubes, one uses a low-inertia energy
source (a field of electrons). As a result, compared to before, it reaches a state of equilibrium
extremely quickly (in a large-scale tube, billionths of a second). As a result, the control gate
works like a variable mold. This mold distributes the energy source so quickly that it’s
performed with no appreciable delay. The variable mold adjusts how a source’s potential energy
is actualized over time. It doesn’t stop once it reaches equilibrium” -- In fact, it reaches it
immediately -- “It doesn’t stop once it reaches equilibrium; it continues modifying the mold, i.e.,
the gate voltage. Actualization is almost instantaneous; it doesn’t stop to unmold because the
circulation of the energy source acts like a constant process of un-molding. A modulator is a
temporary, continuous mold.”5 Wonderful—that’s exactly what we needed for… [Deleuze does
not finish the sentence]

Now… I think… at the same time… see, at the same time, we’re figuring out our concept of
analogy. Insofar as it has to satisfy a two-fold requirement—which is nearly contradictory, but
that’s no problem. Our twofold requirement… First: that we cannot be content to define analogy
as likeness or as conveying likeness. In fact, analogy’s finest moment, such as royal or aesthetic
analogy, is when likeness is what is produced and not what produces. But on the other hand, at

                                                                                                        5

the same time, we must group all these instances of analogy under a single concept, including
analogies of mere likeness.

And I’m inclined to satisfy both of these requirements by saying: on one hand, likeness is not
what defines analogy and analogical language, it’s is modulation. Rousseau was absolutely right;
analogical language is a language of modulation. On the other hand, I can group the different
instances of analogy—including that of mere likeness, vulgar analogy—by saying: but be
careful—modulation is only the end of a sequence, a sequence of sub-concepts, a sequence of
operations: one that I’ll call molding, another that I’ll call internal molding, the third that I’ll call
modulation, in the strict sense.

Simondon concludes the page I was just on—so great, page 41-42—saying that there is a
sequence. And then he goes on: “Mold and modulator are extreme cases, but the process of
taking shape is essentially the same. It consists in establishing an energy regime, durable or no.
To mold is to modulate definitively; to modulate is to mold in a continuous and perpetually
variable fashion.” There’s something in between them, he says. He calls it “modeling.” It’s clear
that modeling is the intermediary between molding and modulation. It already hints at a
continuous, temporary mold. “Modeling” for us would be, perhaps, not quite precise enough a
determination. We saw that it worked better for our purposes to have the three forms of analogy
as: external mold, Buffon’s internal mold, and modulation.

And now, we have … [Pause; Deleuze whispers something to someone near him]

You see… [Laughter] Wait, just give me one second, because I’m wrapping up… I feel… yes, in
order to set our terms, I’ll add: first, we have molding, which I’ll link to a type of legality that for
now we’ll call crystalline legality; second, the internal mold—organic legality; and for the
third… here, our wording changes at the moment… I’d like to call it either “aesthetic legality”
or, drawing from Simondon, maybe “energetic legality.”

So, you see that I can simply conclude this first point: “modulation,” I claim, is a concept just as
coherent, consistent as its counterpart of “articulation.” It allows us both to define something
particular about aesthetic analogy or the aesthetic act, as well as something about analogy in
general. The particular aspect is how one distinguishes modulation from any sort of molding.
And the general description is how there is a series that runs from molding to modulation and
from modulation to molding. Right, so, that’s the first point… Yes?

Georges Comtesse: I wanted to bring up language—digital language and analogical language, for
example, what you find in information theory, communication theory, Pragmatism — [Paul]
Watzlawick or [Gregory] Bateson, for example. It’s that the distinction they draw, Bateson in
particular, in particular his first book, Naven,6 the distinction they draw between digital language
and analogical language be totally covered and explained by a simple “linguistic channel”.

For example, you have… the speech you put out presupposes a linguistic channel where, within
the molar units, the meaningful units, of language, there’s a binary choice at work at the level of
the elements in or at the level of articulation. That’s a linguistic channel. The linguistic channel
is a channel corresponding to spoken language [la langue].7 Obviously, if we define morphemes

                                                                                                       6

and phonemes, meaningful units and distinctive traits, we’re working with structure, that “of
spoken language.” And we’re on a linguistic channel. Except that the digital/analog distinction
doesn’t reside—in information and communication theory, in pragmatist behavior theory—it
doesn’t exist at the level of the linguistic channel, at the level of spoken language, but at the level
of language’s sense. It’s the difference between language and spoken language. For example,
someone like Watzlawick says: “The real difference between analogical and digital language is
that digital language does have a binary, but it doesn’t address the elements of spoken language.”
Not just the elements of spoken language. The binary assumes that language, in order for the
language’s syntax to be homogeneous with its semantics, it has to recognize—in that identity—it
necessarily has to recognize two elements as mutually exclusive: “and” and “or.” That’s crucial.

That is, if we recognize that when we talk, whatever the status of our linguistic channel, what we
say in a language—according to or through spoken language—presupposes that “and” and “or”
are exclusive, regardless of the content of what we say; then we’re dealing with digital,
unambiguously digital, language. Whereas, they say, analogical language, well, analogical
language is when the exclusive difference between “and” and “or” fades away and is replaced by
a mirror-image likeness, a reversibility between “and” and “or.”

They give an example, a very famous example. They say, analogical language might be, not
simply an animal’s cry. But in terms of humans, it might be a smile. And they say that when
someone smiles, you cannot tell if their smile comes from joy, or sadness, or love, or hate. In
other words, in real life “and” and “or” aren’t mutually exclusive. Such that analogical language,
far from being a language with univocal meaning, where syntax and semantics are homogeneous,
is rather a language with equivocal meaning. It’s the profound equivocity of analogical language,
i.e., the difference between analogical language and digital language only obfuscates—only a
little, not too much—the fundamental structure of the voice, only it isn’t linguistic. The voice,
that is, the difference between difference and identity, the difference between “and” and “or”
being different and “and” and “or” being identical. “And” over “or” – “and” equals “or.”

That is, the voice remains in all of pragmatic theory. It’s what pragmatic theory does not explain,
just how this voice’s structure applies to them, and where such a structure comes from, one
where afterwards the difference between digital language and analogical language can only be
slightly blurred, certainly very misleading when it comes to the difference, the very subdivisions
of language.

Deleuze: Excellent. Excellent. But… -- [Deleuze speaks to someone who wishes to respond] yes,
just one moment -- but that all sounds like confirming comments. It’s not… I mean, this is just
me trying to understand. Is that an objection?

Claire Parnet: Not at all! It’s—

Deleuze: Sorry, one second. Then you can keep going. Because… personally, what I’d object
to—my only objection, and what’s missing… I’m fine with everything you just added. The only
thing bothering me is that, actually, analogy—this definition of digital language makes
significant progress, but in my view, it remains essentially binary, the binary being that between
“and” and “or.” What bothers me is that this is still a primarily negative definition of analogy; it

                                                                                                   7

still doesn’t offer a positive definition like what we’ve attempted with modulation. But I think
that everything you said is really very good; it needs to be added to our work, so we’ll add it.

Anne Querrien: I’ve read the texts that Comtesse mentions, and I believe that we would have to
put this differently to have them better correspond to what you are doing. That is, instead of
opposing “and” and “or,” we should oppose two uses of “and.” There is the exclusive “and,”
which really means “or”—that’s the digital. And then there is the “and” in the sense of
conjunctive synthesis, that is, it’s “and, and, and, etc.” – Anyway, we don’t need to give
examples, there are plenty -- And analog might just be the domain of disjunctive synthesis, er,
the disjunctive synthesis [she corrects herself] …

Deleuze: Ah, yes, but now things get complicated. Yes, yes, hmm…

Anne Querrien: [Inaudible words]

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes…

Anne Querrien: And then the other thing I wanted to bring up was on the last, the last form of
legality, which I would call machinic rather than energetic because, in fact, I believe that
legality, the three molds, etc., will corresponds to the three states of energy [inaudible words] …

Deleuze: Ah yes, completely… yes, you’re right; energy is everywhere.

Anne Querrien: … the first law of thermodynamics; organic legality, is the second law; and
modulation is the third law that we are in the process of … [inaudible words]

Deleuze: Yeah, okay. That’s not bad.

Richard Pinhas:8 I just want to cut in here, because I haven’t developed it. From a simple
practical or scientific point of view [inaudible word], whatever language you use -- and you learn
it in first year in computer science, and all the way to the most recent developments -- the “and”
doesn’t exist. So, then your question is resolved: there is no “and.” You have zero and one; at the
same time, the “and” is excluded from all possible computer language, from the most modern to
the most rudimentary. There is no “and.” The “or” functions wholly digitally. And at no point
would it be acceptable to use the term “and” in the linguistic sense of the term, because you
simplify the term in the semiotic sense with which we’ve become familiar in recent years. It
doesn’t exist.

Deleuze: Unless, Richard, I think that amounts to the same thing, unless we agree that, in the
conditions in which Comtesse is operating, we agree that the binary is between “and” and “or,”
rather than between [three terms].9

Pinhas: It doesn’t work like that.

Deleuze: If it’s truly a binary language…

                                                                                                   8

Pinhas: I’ll just tell you how it works. That’s not how it functions. It doesn’t work with “or”.
And it’s completely… [inaudible words]

Deleuze: Yes, but the “or” is between two terms. [Anne Querrien tries to intervene]

Pinhas: No, no, but… every primary computer, from the very simple early microprocessors to
the most complex, the most complicated computers using the most complicated military
language, it basically works as grounded in exclusions. And it’s impossible for these to work
grounded in [inaudible words]. These exclusions/exceptions form integrative modules on a
higher level if you will. You could always rebuild something else and say that in an advanced
computer language, you’ll be able to form strings of characters that necessarily lead to
conjunctions, but they’ll be in separate chunks. But in very, very simple terms, the mode of
digital operation precludes “and.” I’m absolutely formal about that. If we use “and” to try and
locate the criteria differentiating analog and digital, which means…

Deleuze: Right, I see what you mean… yes, yes, yes… yes, yes, yes… that seems… yes, that’s…
everything is allowed here. [Throughout this exchange, Claire Parnet’s comments are heard as
she is directly next to the microphone]

Another woman student: I would like to recall a text by Thom that might be useful for us.
There’s a recent text by René Thom in which he explains that there are two sorts of analogy. The
first form of analogy, he says, has been around since Aristotle, an example of which might be
like: “Old age is to youth what night is to day.” And he says that you can look at it as an act of
completion [le fait de finir], and so he says that there would first be this form of analogy that
doesn’t produce anything new, and it’s based on [substantives].

Deleuze: Based on…?

The student: On [substantives], this would be completion, but responsible for that.

Deleuze: Yes, responsible for that.

The student: And then there is a second unfamiliar or less familiar form of analogy, which
Bergson studied, and which would instead be based on the [verb] and would be, for example,
dependence.10

Deleuze: Right, yes, yes.

The student: We can say that the first analogy is responsible, founded in the substantive; it
doesn’t tell us anything new.

Deleuze: That’s the mold, right.

The student: While on the other hand, the second would be based on a verb—an open-ended
verb, right, so you don’t know where it’s going.

                                                                                                           9

Deleuze: We need a third one.

The student: I have an objection about your first form of analogy…

Deleuze: An objection? Ah, right… [Laughter]

Parnet: Not permitted!

The student: Because when you speak of conveying likeness, whether a likeness in relation or
likeness in quality, what we would normally think of is a semantic analogy, which would be a
conveyance of quality, as opposed to what would be relation-based analogy, and thus would be
syntactical. And the idea we end up with is that there’s a kind of analogy that’s structural. If it is
structural…

Deleuze: You’re the one drawing that conclusion. Not me, not me.

The student: Anyone would.

Deleuze: Oh, anyone would… well, then…. [Laughter]

The student: If it is structural, it’s internal structure. It isn’t external. Besides, when you refer to
crystals by analogy, you say that crystals grow on the edges, but that’s not what defines them.

Deleuze: I didn’t say that.

The student: What defines them is their internal structure, so that has to change.

Deleuze: No. I don’t think so.

Parnet: Well, really, that works fine.

The first student: It doesn’t work.

Deleuze: No, because at that point you have to say… no, you should just admit that such a
definition of the crystal bleeds over into being a module, that it isn’t a matter of molding. And
what are crystallographers actually talking about when they talk about crystallization? They call
it “seeding.” It’s a perfect example, then, of a module. It’s not at all… yeah. So that would work
out without us having to change thing. See, rather than a mold, an “internal mold,” (again, I think
it’s a fantastic, wonderful concept) and modulation, we now have mold, module, modulation.
The three forms of analogy. Look.

Anne Querrien: [Inaudible comment]

Deleuze: That’s not all. As I see it, energy was what defined the external mold, but that—we’ll
see later… when it comes to art, energy is strictly subordinate to form. While elsewhere energy

                                                                                                    10

isn’t subordinate to form. Those are the stages. You can distinguish them in terms of the three
states of energy. Yes?

Comtesse: I find myself in deep disagreement with you:11 it’s impossible to get around the
particular problem of the voice in communication theory by directly translating it into the terms
of Anti-Oedipus – except through a drastic over-simplification -- to the extent that in
Watzlawick’s or Bateson’s own work, what they fundamentally rule out is matter, energy, the
unconscious, accepting instead an idea that strikes me as total ideology, namely, making
symptoms depend on a circular causality of interpersonal interactions.

Anne Querrien: [Inaudible comments, disagreeing with Comtesse]

Deleuze: Well, it looks like we’re all on the same page! [Laughter] Then… But in fact, Richard’s
comment is very important, and… [Interruption of the recording] [46:45]

… You’re talking about a binary calculation, right?

Pinhas: It’s bound to functional requirements. Whatever works.

Deleuze: Yes, that’s right. [Pinhas tries to respond] Yes. But that’s actually really helpful for
explaining what articulation is.

Pinhas: But it’s not a theoretical model. What has to be understood is that the theoretical model
results from practical data [indistinct words]… Even when early computers began working, with
the earliest computers—you find in Pascal’s models, and so on—but they were discovered after,
it started to get theorized afterwards. Computer meta-languages, including the advanced kinds
like COBOL [other indistinct names of 1980s software] that are used today, are derived from
these laws. I mean, at a later moment, they came to appreciate that, effectively, computers
function—computers broadly speaking, at least—function via a method of exclusion. Not that
that’s good or bad… [inaudible words]

Deleuze: That idea is crucial for our definition of articulation. Yes. It’s fundamental.

Pinhas: Hence the necessity of a double articulation, which we don’t necessarily see with analog.

Deleuze: Well, you don’t get articulation at all with analog.

Pinhas: Systematically you find, in every metalanguage, that is, in every operational computer
language, whether for medical use or for military use, or whatever it might be, you’ll run into
articulation.

Deleuze: Okay. Well, this is perfect. Then let’s move on; let’s keep moving. Just one more thing
I’ll say, since we still have to come back to our business with painting, but I think… that… we’re
going to be much better equipped for when we do come back to it.

                                                                                                    11

So… what is… in the technical sense, put in simplest terms… it’ll be your job to expand on it, as
always… in terms of technology, then, what is the act of modulation as the limit, if you like, of
every instance of molding or modeling? What is it? Well, two areas. I’ll very briefly go over two
areas in really childish terms, since I want to play it safe. The first area—see Richard Pinhas for
any further comments or corrections. We distinguish two sorts of synthesizers: analog
synthesizers and digital synthesizers. What’s the difference? I mean, what is the basic difference,
or what seems to be the basic difference between these two sorts of audio synthesizers?

See, I just want to find some technological applications to see if our concept of modulation is off
to a good start. Well, analog synthesizers are called “modular.” Digital synthesizers are called
“integrated.” What does it mean to be modular or integrated, in concrete terms? It means that in
an analog or modular synthesizer, there is a connection between sounds; we hook up—I’m really
simplifying things—disparate sounds. But this connection is forged on a genuinely “immanent
plane” [plan immanent]. Put another way: when reproducing sound by connecting elements,
producing a sound is achieved by means of a plane where everything is responsive. In other
words, production is no less responsive than the product itself. In other words, every step of the
process in an analog synthesizer is active and responsive. That’s why the plane is immanent,
since the process behind the product… the process of production is no less responsive than the
product itself. At that point we can say there’s genuinely a modulation. It’s a modular
synthesizer.

On the other hand, what characterizes the digital, or integrated, synthesizer? This time, the
principle behind making the product—the produced audio—involves what’s called an integrated
plane, integrated specifically because it’s distinct. What does this distinct plane actually entail? It
entails homogenization and binarization, binarization of what’s known as data. Homogenization
and binarization occur on a distinct, integrated plane. Such that the product’s production entails a
distinction between levels. The principle… [Interruption of the recording] [52:52]

Part 2

[Overlap with previous tape: … On the other hand, what characterizes the digital, or integrated,
synthesizer? This time, the principle behind making the product—the produced audio—involves
what’s called an integrated plane, integrated specifically because it’s distinct. What does this
distinct plane actually entail? It entails homogenization and binarization, binarization of what’s
known as data. Homogenization and binarization occur on a distinct, integrated plane. Such that
the product’s production entails a distinction between levels. The principle (overlap end)] …
behind production won’t be discernible in the discernible product; it goes through an integrated
plane and the binary code that constitutes it.

And this allows us to make a little bit of progress. This is because digital synthesizers have a
[greater] productive capacity [puissance], I believe, than analog12 synthesizers. How so? Already
it’s like something’s telling us to stop thinking of the analog/digital distinction in terms of
opposition, somehow it’s possible (or desirable) to transplant code into analog in order to
magnify analog’s capacity [puissance]. [Pause] Do you see something to add here? I’m sticking
to the basics in this.

                                                                                                   12

Pinhas: Just one small thing. It’s that digital methods only authorize mathematical, countable,
deferred time, while analog methods authorize what is one of their defining characteristics, one
of their innate characteristics, in addition to the ones you described: real time.

Deleuze: In a way it’s the same as saying, yes, that follows from… It’s not the same thing.
You’re correct, but that follows directly from the idea of a principle of production that’s just as
discernible as the product. Henceforth, time is necessarily real-time, whereas in the case of
integrated planes where the plane is distinct—since you necessarily get non-real-time, because if
you have a jump. You can only arrive at the product through an act of translation, conversion.

Pinhas: Building on that point, I don’t know if it was a goal, but transplanting a digital control
system into something, say, primarily analog—that’d be the norm in today’s top-end systems…

Deleuze: That’s right, that’s right.

Pinhas: In other words, the only systems that operate efficiently in real-time are so-called hybrid
systems in computer terms, analog-based systems fitted with digital controls.

Deleuze: Yes, that’s what is known as a true code transfer into analog. But what transfers code
when it comes to painting? You can see it right away: the abstract painter. It’s the abstract
painter who pulls it off, and that’s why all of painting’s power involves abstraction. And that
means…. it… That doesn’t make painting abstract or mean that it ought to be abstract; it means
that abstract painting consists in transferring code into the analog pictorial flow, and this is what
gives painting power, so much so that, in a way, every painter makes use of abstraction; the
diagram is in the painting itself. But then we start, we would start—see, something new is taking
shape—no longer thinking of diagram and code as particularly opposed to each other but
considering the possibility of transferring code into diagrams.

In other words, of doing—for those already familiar, I won’t belabor it—of doing the complete
opposite of Peirce. Because Peirce instead saw analog operations, diagram operations, within
code. So, this would turn that on its head and make—well, it doesn’t matter… Fine!

A second technological example, even simpler: What do you call a modulation when it comes to
TV? What goes on there? What’s the definition of modulation, if we’re just looking it up in the
dictionary? What does it tell us about modulation? It says that modulation is, right—it’s an
operation related to waves. It’s the state a wave takes on—but in response to what? A so-called
“carrier wave.” What does it carry? Well, it depends on what signal is transmitted. The carrier
wave is modulated according to the transmitted signal; see, it’s simple. With the TV you look at
every day, a carrier wave is modulated according to a transmitted signal. Alright? Good.

So, what does “modulate” mean? It means that you modify either the frequency or the amplitude
of the wave—you’re familiar with these two well-known terms: frequency modulation (FM),
amplitude modulation (AM). You modify the amplitude or the frequency of the carrier wave
according to the signal. Okay. What does the receiver do? It demodulates. That is, it recovers the
signal. I’m barely scratching the surface; that’s really rudimentary—but why do I find this
interesting? Because it gives me a kind of rough example of what I call “produced resemblance.”

                                                                                                  13

Demodulation is the production of resemblance—how do you recover the signal? Not by
conveying a likeness, [but] through modulation, i.e., by employing entirely different means.
What other means? By altering the carrier wave’s amplitude or frequency. All right. But in this
case, see, I’m going with the easiest example: a continuous signal. What happens when the signal
is discontinuous or discrete, or as they say, a signal consisting in a series of discrete pulses?
What if the signal is made of a series of discrete pulses? One of two outcomes. In this case, at
any rate—before we get to the two outcomes—at any rate, you’ll translate the carrier wave,
which will give you something new, a sequence of periodic pulses. Converting the carrier wave
into a sequence of periodic pulses. And then there are two outcomes.

First: with this sequence of periodic pulses, you either modify the pulse’s amplitude, the
duration—that is, the length of one pulse relative to that of another pulse—or the position, which
is actually more interesting: see, you modify the pulse’s position rather than its duration, that is,
you offset its timing. Thus, you modify the amplitude, the duration, or the position. That’s the
first case, and that’s what modulation is. Consider what problem that’s meant to address. It’s...
it’s a matter of—and this is very important for our purposes—of demonstrating when modulation
can grasp the discontinuous as such. You can carry out a modulation of the discontinuous and a
modulation of the discrete.

Second—something even more important, an even more modern process, which was invented
around 19…13 [Interruption of the recording] [1:03:40]

… binary code. More specifically, binary in 0-1: “0” when there’s no pulse, “1” when there is a
pulse. That’s the best system. What do you get by grouping pulses in binary code? You get
exactly the same result as what we just looked at: a transplant of code into analogical material or
flux.

So far, so good. I’m trying to draw some conclusions before you… cut in, if… so, here’s the
point of this long tangent on the concept of modulation. As I see it, what we get from this is a
concept of modulation that goes from mold to modulation proper. [Which] via the module, starts
to take shape. The second point: from one point of view, we think of modulation and articulation,
analog and digital, as two completely opposite determinations. But from another point of view,
we could say that every digital language and every code is deeply embedded in an analogical
flux. In other words, every code is in truth grafted onto an analog ground or an analogical flux.

The third point: analogy, in the strictest sense—or in an aesthetic sense—can be defined as
modulation. How so? Precisely because there’s no conveyance of qualitative likeness in an
aesthetic operation, or an operation of the molding type, apparently at least, because there isn’t
simply a module conveying internal relations but a real modulation, that is, producing likeness
through dissimilar means, non-resembling means. The production of resemblance through
completely different means. The production of resemblance through non-resembling means. And
that’s what presence is, what we call the presence of the figure.

So, I’ll come back to my definition of painting: if we’re going to add yet another—there are so
many definitions of painting—at least ours is framed by our problem, so it’s sure to suit our

                                                                                                     14

purposes. We can’t be sure that it’s right, but at any rate it’s no worse than any other definition.
And besides, it’s necessary because we formed it based on everything we covered before.

Thus, I’d say that to paint is to modulate, but what modulates what? What does it modulate, on
what basis? Because to modulate is always to modulate something in accordance with something.
It’s to modulate according to plan.14 Alright then. It’s to modulate according to plan. What do
you modulate to plan, that is, on a surface? The canvas. What is the “wave” in painting? The
wave is quite straightforward. I can’t say exactly what it is, because it’s and/or, and/or—well,
what is it? The wave, the carrier wave, is light or color. It’s light and color.

To paint is to modulate light; it’s to modulate color. Now we’re echoing Cézanne: “modulate.”
But the word “modulate”—the way Cézanne uses it—is all the more interesting given that he
sometimes contrasts it with something well-established in painting: modeling. See, we’re back in
the sequence: mold, model, modulate. Molding, modeling, modulation. Does Cézanne’s
achievement make him better than someone who came before? No, that’s not how it is. But what
sort of modulation does Cézanne claim to use? Simply from looking at a Cézanne, it’s not a
modulation of light. It’s a modulation of color. And it’s precisely because he finds—because
Cézanne invents a new regime of color that invokes the concept of modulation. Right. And
everyone else? Well, whatever it was they were doing, they weren’t yet modulating color. Then
we might have to ask, does that mean they’re modulating light? But does modulating light
follow the same rules as when you modulate color? I’m not so sure.

Cut to [Pierre] Bonnard’s notes. Of all the great painters, Bonnard is among those who had the
least to say. It’s a pity because his notes are all… they’re all gems. We find this in Bonnard’s
notes; we find the following quote—this is nearly verbatim: “With a single drop of oil—Titian
would make a whole arm with a single dollop of oil. Cézanne, on the other hand, wanted his
choice of every color to be deliberate.”15 It’s a nice thought, but, well, what exactly is Bonnard
trying to say?

Painters take one dollop of oil and paint an entire arm with a single color. That’s not how
Cézanne does things. Appreciate the fact that we’re already dealing with the continuous and the
discontinuous. Cézanne wanted every color to be deliberate. That is, he proceeded by
juxtaposing colors. He painted an arm by juxtaposing colors. How so? By following a law. What
law? A law of modulation. And for him, then, it’s literally a modulation. Using the technical
terms from earlier: it’s a modulation via discrete pulses.

And what sort of modulation is the other method? He paints a whole arm with one color—it’s
obviously not a color modulation using discrete pulses; it’s a modulation in continuity, which
uses values instead of tones.

All values of a single color. All right. Our problem of the continuous and discontinuous, now in
terms of modulation. Perfectly illustrated by Bonnard’s comment on two approaches to painting
an arm. Anyway. What does that mean? I mean, at this stage, if it’s true that painting is the
modulation of light or the modulation of color—or both at once—there will be extremely diverse
kinds of modulation. We’re left with a major problem: the problem of painting. At any rate, it
would mean modulating. Okay, modulating—do we mean modulating broadly speaking, in a

                                                                                                     15

way equally applicable to molding or modeling? Or is it modulating in a strict sense, such that
it’s distinct from any sort of molding or modeling? We’ll leave both options on the table and say
that it’s sometimes one, sometimes the other.

Finally, the last question: to modulate is to modulate something—light or color. But on what
basis? What’s the “signal” here? Modulation is based on a signal, a signal to be transmitted.
What would the signal be? In other words, what is the signal of painting? It isn’t the model. The
model is already an instance, is already an instance where modulation comes down to, where it
tends or leans toward the mold. So, if the transmitted signal isn’t the same as the model, the
model is simply a form of modulation in the broad sense. What is the signal? The signal is space.
A painter paints nothing but space—and maybe time, too, but uh… they never paint anything
other than space-time: that’s the signal. The signal to be transmitted onto the canvas is space.

But what space? Perhaps the main styles of painting differ according to the nature of their
spaces, the nature of their space-times. A space-time to be transmitted on canvas. All right. That
gives me my complete definition: To paint is to modulate light, color, or light and color based on
a signal space.

Well, it’s still missing something—what do we get? What do we get? We get the figure, we get
resemblance, we get a resemblance more profound than photographic resemblance. A
resemblance to the thing which is more profound than the thing itself. We get a non-similar
resemblance, i.e., resemblance produced through different means. The act of modulation is
comprised precisely of these different means. What results from modulating light or color
according to a signal space? The thing in its presence. Hence the focus of painting isn’t the same
once it resembles something; it’s not figurative, clearly, since what’s on the canvas is the thing
itself. With that, I have all the parts of my definition.

As a result, there are only two problems left to consider, which is perfect, since it’s the end of the
year. Uh, two problems, two sets of problems: what are the major signal-spaces? What are the
main signal-spaces in painting? First problem. Second problem: How does modulation work in
each of these spaces? I mean, it’s obvious, it goes without saying, that if you look at the Egyptian
signal-space, it’s not the same as the Byzantine signal-space.

So, if there were such a thing as a sociology of painting, you can see what it would mean: the
identification of painting’s signal-spaces based on groups or civilizations or collectivities. You
could refer to them like people normally would: a Renaissance space, an Egyptian space, etc.
And you’d figure out what form of modulation, in the broad sense, corresponds to the signalspace of an art, a period of art—whether molding, modeling, or modulation proper—as well as
the laws governing this correspondence.

Yes, there was a comment earlier—no other comments? That’s fine. You have a comment?

Anne Querrien: Current research into television technology is working on liquid crystal displays.
And on these displays, the image will—color will be displayed discretely point by point, and
there won’t be any grain like there is with TVs today, which make tiny [inaudible words] by
combining red, green… There will be an entirely different image, without black holes.

                                                                                                  16

Deleuze: Won’t that involve transplanted code?

Anne Querrien: Absolutely—then the screen becomes responsive, is grafted onto an analogical
flux. The signal is still digitally coded, but the screen corresponds to what you’ve defined
analogically.

Deleuze: Wonderful! Wonderful!

Another student: Wouldn’t this be like fiction, in Philip K. Dick, who describes advertisements
coming from the future, which would be messages grafted onto kind of amoebas, crystals, like
some sort of Martian, and that work like that, by coming into your home and constantly repeating
their message?

Deleuze: What a time to be alive! [Laughter]

Pinhas: Just to support something important you were saying about the research. You brought up
bundling discrete—or encoded—information, and that’s so central to the discourse surrounding
recent communication technology that they have a name for these groups of impulses: they’re
called packets.

Deleuze: Packets?

Pinhas: Not in French, in English.

Deleuze: In French?

Pinhas: Paquets, information packets, all the more important due to the fact that networks have
been created, both private and national, for transmitting these packets; they’re transmitting data,
they’re transmitting discrete pulses, and the national French network is called TRANSPAC. It’s
national—private groups aren’t allowed to use it. It’s not an obscure network, but it’s not widely
known yet. Which makes it so that you can send a packet of information from Paris to Lyon, or
from Paris to Los Angeles. TRANSPAC means easing and shortening the transmission of
packets; because the information is bundled into packets, of course, we get the accumulation you
were talking about, and it’s become a key concept for communication technology.

Deleuze: Great! So can we steal a packet! [Laughter] [Interruption of the recording, apparently
following a break] [1:21:46]

… [Pause] Well, since there are only two things left to cover, let’s start with the first: the nature
of signal-spaces. [Pause, sounds of chairs and students as they return] And I’d like to start things
off with one type of space in particular. Just arbitrarily, so that we can try… bear this in mind: as
we think about spaces, always come back to a central problem as our touchstone—that of
modulation. Therefore, I’m picking signal-spaces based on what we need regarding the category
of modulation.

                                                                                                     17

And I’d like to come back to something I touched on years ago but under different
circumstances: What space did so-called Western art come from, or: What exactly is Egyptian
space, ultimately? Egyptian space being an example of a signal-space that inspires forms of
painting and sculpture. I’m getting this from an author who’s starting to take off in France but
who still doesn’t get his due, a Viennese author, a very important Austrian author from the late
19th, early 20th century named Alois Riegl. Because his contribution to aesthetics is
indisputable. And, in particular, some of his analyses focused on Egyptian space. I’ll list Riegl’s
main works to show you a bit—it’s a book on… that’s titled Problems of Style, so great, where
among other things he discusses the evolution of certain decorative elements when they move
from Egypt into Greece. Another really great book from Riegl: The Group Portraiture of
Holland. Finally, there’s what’s thought to be his main work, Late Roman Art Industry.16 And
finally, to my knowledge the only book translated into French: Historical Grammar of the Visual
Arts.

But Historical Grammar of the Visual Arts still gives you an idea of Riegl’s thought, so drawing
from Historical Grammar of the Visual Arts and Late Roman Art Industry, I’d like to work out a
few characteristics that will pave the way for what’s to come. Characteristics Riegl uses to
describe Egyptian space, and you’ll see that it works well with the idea of a signal.

Anyway, I’ll delineate a few characteristics: the first characteristic—I’m getting this, I should
point out, I’m getting this from Riegl. The first characteristic, one of Riegl’s basic ideas, is that
art is never defined by what one can do but by what one wants to do. At art’s core there is a
will.17 And from a certain perspective, he holds on to a sort of idealist standard. Material—it’s
the idea that material always bends to a will. And that it’s not a question of saying, “The artist
didn’t know how to do it.” There is no know-how [savoir-faire], or at least, it’s fundamentally
subordinate to what Riegl calls a will-do [vouloir-faire]. The approach works for us because it’s
not me—the problems pose themselves. What’s the deal with this “will-do”? What is it? Just
what exactly is this “will-to-art”? He keeps coming back to this will-to-art.

But if we accept this point of departure, what is it that they want? What does the Egyptian artist
want? Riegl’s response is very brief: the Egyptian artist, as an Egyptian man—what does he
want? He wants to extract essence. That itself should be noteworthy, because here we have
somebody who isn’t a philosopher, who’s telling us that the Egyptian artist extracts essence—
from what? From appearance. Why would they want to do that? Because appearance is what
changes; it’s the variable phenomenon. The phenomenon is appearance: appearance is
tumultuous, appearance is dangerous, appearance is in flux, from which essence is extracted.
Eternal essence. Simply put: essence, eternal essence, is individual essence. It’s about preserving
the individual in its essence. Thus, subtracting it from the world of appearance.

What should we, insofar as we’re doing philosophy, take away from that? Because there’s an
odd discrepancy here: we’re usually told that this is a Greek gesture. This seems like a minor
detail, but it’ll be important for us later on. Indeed, we’re told, well, think of Nietzsche’s writing,
when he defines metaphysics and Plato. We’re told that the fundamental axis of Greek
metaphysics is the opposition between two worlds: a world of essences which is abstracted from
appearances, a world of calm, eternal essences. Thus, a refuge beyond appearances; Nietzsche

                                                                                                   18

describes the enterprise of Greek metaphysics as this distinction between essence and
appearance, as drawing essence out of appearances.

And Heidegger takes up this aspect of Nietzsche; it’s intriguing—I mean, what’s intriguing. Why
is this relevant for us? After all, Riegl, on the subject of art, used these terms not to define Greek
art but in order to define Egyptian art, as an Egyptian approach. It’s reminiscent of the Timaeus,
where Plato has the Egyptians say, “You Greeks are never anything but children to us.” You
Greeks are only children. So, what if we were wrong to define the Greek world by the distinction
between essence and appearance, if it was actually a definition better suited, not to the Greek
world, but to the Egyptian world? And what does Egypt have to say? What does Egypt say?
What does the Egyptian say, according to Riegl? The Egyptian focuses on what’s called the ka—
that’s “ka,” k-a—a copy or double of one’s individual essence, removed at death, etc., etc. It’s
the double, the subtracted double, freeing essence from randomness, from change.

But what is this essence? This individual essence. Its law is that of enclosure. It’s closed off,
shielded from accident, shielded from the flow of phenomena, shielded from variation—it’s
enclosed; it’s an enclosed unity. The enclosed unity of the individual. What enclosure? Well, the
contour. Individual essence is established by the contour which encloses it. Well, what is that?
Riegl tells us that it’s geometric abstraction. Enclosure is the abstract geometric line that
surrounds the individual essence and shelters it from becoming. Every figure, that is, every
individual essence’s contour will be isolated. Well, there you have it, the will to extract essence
from nature. Which Riegl—only, the translation says “improves nature”:18 it is art intended to
improve on nature. Never, as Riegl says, is art meant to imitate nature; there are several things it
can purport to do. According to Riegl, it can do three things: improve nature, spiritualize it, or recreate it. Egyptian art improves nature by extracting isolated essences from the phenomenal,
from becoming.

Second characteristic: if the Egyptian will-to-art is to extract essence, how does it go about it?
Through what means? Riegl says it’s via surface-level transcription. The tool Egyptian art uses
to reveal individual essences is the flat surface… how does that ward off the accidental, the
changeable, or becoming? It’s a matter of suppressing spatial relations by making them—by
transforming them into planimetric relations, i.e., pinning them down onto a plane. Thus, the
formula for Egyptian art is to use the contour that isolates form onto a plane. The contour that
isolated form onto a plane – let’s take that literally – you sense that it all comes down to space:
what is this planned or flattened [planifié] space? In fact, it is depth; from relations in space
come variations, variations emerge, becoming emerges. Here, open spatial relationships are
suppressed, giving way to a planning or flattening [planification] of the surface. There are no
more relations; the aesthetic relationship is the one on the plane [sur le plan].19 So, on the plane,
the contour isolates the form of individual essence; the contour is the geometric line; the figure is
the individual essence, and the contour isolates the individual figure onto the plane.

Well, what does that mean? How is it translated? Everything’s become—all the relations are
planned. Meaning that, for the Egyptian artist, form and ground absolutely, positively must be on
the same plane. For form and ground to be equally close, equally close to each other and equally
close to ourselves. So, that makes the Egyptian approach clearer: as close to each other as to
ourselves. We take up both form and ground on the same plane.

                                                                                                      19

What is that? Form and ground will be close to each other and no less close to us, the viewer.
What does that mean exactly henceforth? Hey… [Pause, Deleuze is interrupted by someone
changing a cassette rather loudly] In concrete terms, it is bas-relief; in essence, Egyptian art is
bas-relief or what amounts to bas-relief—what’s the opposite of bas-relief? High relief.

High relief—as if there were three stages: bas-relief, high relief, and then… and then what? Basrelief is when the relief is barely distinct from the ground, on the verge of having form and
ground on the same plane; you take in form and ground on the same plane. Then high relief: no
shadow or very little shadow, no modeling. No overlapping figures…in accordance with the
Egyptian will to art: no overlapping figures—as an example, no overlapping figures: almost a
law in Egyptian art. Indeed, if figures are individual essences set off by a contour, having figures
overlap would fundamentally be a flaw, and yet, and in fact, if form and ground are on the same
plane, there are no overlapping figures; figures overlap insofar as there are distinct planes.
Having figures overlap already implies… [Interruption of the recording; there is overlap of the
end of this paragraph into the following one] [1:39:41]

Part 3

[Overlap begins: … and yet, and in fact, if form and ground are on the same plane, there are no
overlapping figures; figures overlap insofar as there are distinct planes. Having overlapping
figures already implies (end of overlap)] an art capable of distinguishing between different
planes. Is it because the Egyptians didn’t know how to make figures overlap? They didn’t know
how? Was it a lack of know-how [savoir-faire]? Not at all. In fact, sometimes, sometimes—in
very rare instances—figures do overlap. When do figures overlap in Egyptian bas-relief? Oddly
enough, among other things, it happens in battle scenes… in battle scenes and with rows of
prisoners in particular. As if having figures overlap referred us to a world of variation and
becoming only suitable for those who have lost their essence.

So, they knew how to do it, strictly speaking, but it ran counter to their will-to-art. Bas-relief
means rejecting shadow, rejecting modeling, rejecting overlap, rejecting depth. Form and ground
belong on the same plane. These rejections do not betray a lack of knowledge [savoir-faire] but
the presence of will [vouloir-faire]. What would prove this? Riegl is brilliant as always—Riegl is
such a genius. For example, he analyzes drapery [le pli], the evolution of drapery, the folds in
clothing. And he says, “Look at the folds in Egyptian bas-relief...” – Oh yeah, I forgot the rest --
Look at bas-relief; you’ll see… High relief is when the relief is much more distinctive. There is a
contrast between ground and foreground. As a result, you can almost imagine them turning. And
finally, finally, a breakthrough—but is it a breakthrough or a shift in artistic will? [Interruption
of the recording] [1:42:39]

… going around the statue. Right. Bas-relief is characteristically Egyptian. You might object that
there are many Egyptian statues one can walk around. Sure, yeah, there are. But consider the
circumstances. Like where there are figures that overlap—yeah, but shouldn’t we note that it’s
mainly with rows of prisoners? When figures overlap, it’s like they’ve been relegated to the
world of phenomena. Anyway.

                                                                                                   20

I was talking about folds. It’s enough to compare Egyptian and Greek folds. And Riegl has some
great passages on this. He writes: “Looking at the drapery, it’s laid as if it were pasted down.”
But “pasted down” isn’t criticism. The Egyptian fold, Egyptian drapery, is pasted down, and as a
rule, they don’t pile on layers. Riegl also provides reproductions and analyzes the lining, tucked
up at the bottom of a dress, forming a double layer. How all of that is essentially flattened out on
the same plane. The drapery is pasted down. There is no groove deep enough to cast a shadow.
See, it’s a flattened fold, as if it were ironed.

And Riegl starts to wax lyrical: “Indeed, compare this with the Greek fold.” Ah, the Greek fold.
The Greek fold is something quite different. The dancer leaps, and how is she draped? Wow—
such a different sense of harmony! Now with the chest, the drapery goes like this, is curved
based on a kind of uh, a law of proportion. What would we call it? Let’s just say it follows a
module. A module containing internal, variable relations. With the chest, it’s this movement, and
with the legs. See, the suppleness of Greek drapery. Now that doesn’t mean that Greeks knew
how to do something the Egyptians didn’t: by no means. Not that saying so would be wrong—
just that it would be meaningless. What we can say is that they certainly didn’t interpret clothing
in the same way. What could we say? About clothing? Here I’m getting away from Riegl—but
it’s totally his idea, so not really. What might we say about clothing, the two opposite types of
clothing. You could say, for instance, that [Egyptian] clothing20 is where an edge is folded back
onto another, and then the fold is flattened out as if it were ironed. We should call it “crystalline
clothing.” It’s like [Egyptian] bodies are clothed in crystal. Crystalline clothing.

What about Greek drapery or clothing? It’s organic clothing. The laws have changed. Egyptian
folds exhibit crystallinity. The Greek fold display organicism.21 Then there are still other kinds of
folds. I mean, if we went through the history of drapery—you could, right, if you wanted to—
with drapery, you’ll find for example—but we’d have to take it pretty far; for one, we’d have to
go through all of the Middle Ages, where drapery has an important role to play in Christian
painting. But anyway, at some point we’d see that clothing changes in nature; it’s no longer
organic.

For example, in the 17th century we’ll see—I won’t get into it here, but if it tells us anything,
we’re just flagging things for later—it’s that clothing ceases to be organic in order to become
optical clothing. Folding becomes a purely optical reality. Like the random folds in 17th century
painting—like the fold-marks [pli-trait] are no long fold-lines [pli-ligne]. With the Greeks it’s
still a harmonious line.

But that doesn’t matter—there’d be a long history and all sorts of variations in clothing in
painting, in drapery, but what does that mean? Is it a coincidence that Riegl specifically says
Egyptian laws are crystalline, geometric? And indeed, the significance of the contour—it’s the
contour that isolates—what role does the contour play?

So, at the point we’ve reached, since according to our second characteristic, see our second…
our first characteristic was the enclosed individual essence… then our second characteristic is
that form and ground are necessarily on the same plane. Form is apprehended on the same plane
as the ground.

                                                                                                21

Then what is the contour? It’s very interesting. The contour—insofar as form and ground are
taken up on the same plane—the contour is independent from form. The contour is autonomous.
It’s the geometric contour; it’s independent from organic form. Geometric contours. In other
words, it stands on its own—why? Because it’s the boundary shared by form and ground on the
same plane. It’s the boundary shared by form and ground on the same plane, so it’s autonomous;
it doesn’t depend directly on the form; it doesn’t depend on the ground. It separates and relates
the two indissolubly. It unites form with the ground and separates form from the ground. Where
does it reunite them and where does it separate them? On the very same plane. The contour’s
autonomy. So, the contour is crystalline-geometric.

As a result, Egyptian relief or painting has three distinct elements: the ground (one that’s calm
because emptied of any phenomenal matter), the individual form (a stable, eternal essence), and
the geometric contour that both separates the one from the other and joins them together on the
same plane. It’s a world that’s crystalline-geometric.

What makes us Egyptian? We’re all Egyptian because in a way, the Egyptians established the
three elements of painting. They established the three basic elements of painting: ground, figure,
and contour. Now you’ll say, “That’s too simplistic.” No, not really—not really. What is it that
brings Egypt back to life in our paintings? Quite a few things, perhaps. Perhaps this way no less
than the other way around. We don’t even know where the other way around comes from. I’m
looking for what’s Egyptian. All painting endeavors to minimize the difference between planes.
It’s… it’s a pretty recent development in painting or innovation in painting: a delightful
development known as weak depth. Weak depth, or… [Interruption of the recording] [1:52:30]

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Yes, that’s fine… yes, yes, yes…

The student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Yes, they are a seafaring people…

The student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Very good, very good… Perfect. [Pause] … What?

Anne Querrien: [Inaudible]

Claire Parnet [to Deleuze] : Spinoza ?

Deleuze: Well, there we have a sort of geography… You see, yes, with a modern painting—
coming back to a particularly striking example, a painter I talked about a lot last time: Francis
Bacon. -- What’s so immediately striking in his paintings. Granted it’s not Egyptian art, but what
lets us say that, well, Bacon is an Egyptian, but it’s not just that. He’s an Egyptian.

                                                                                                    22

Look at a painting: there’s a sort of -- most, really, a large majority of Bacon’s paintings, see,
have three distinct elements—much more distinct, I think, than with any other painter today. But
when you try to pick out these elements, you’ll find it isn’t hard with Bacon—you can spot it
right away—he’s a painter where the ground is made up of fields. They’re fields. Straight off,
you can see fields in a Bacon painting. And sections of fields—the field is more or less varied;
sometimes it’s a completely uniform field, which makes the figure… [Interruption of the
recording] [1:54:45]

… It’s fine, introduced into the field [a jump in the recording] … it’s not simply monotone, or
mono… [a jump in the recording] … a monochrome field. Then you have a Figure. A Figure.
And this Figure, well, it’s always athletic, contorted. Obviously, the Figure isn’t Egyptian, but
it’s just as clear as an Egyptian essence.

And then you have a third element. For an example, I’ll use the cover of this book: see, so, you
have fields—for instance, there’s this purple field, a gray field, a yellow—you get the idea, and
then there’s the third element, this strange round area, this lovely round area here on the door.
Generally speaking, Bacon is much more classical—that is, he puts round areas around the
figure’s feet. Now that should tell us something about this history, the enduring persistence of
Egyptian elements. If there’s something more important still, as far as color regimes are
concerned, [it’s the halo].22 Ater all, it wasn’t out of piety that Christian artists, Christian
painters, bothered with halos as much as they did. What exactly are halos? Even within one and
the same halo, you can distinguish between a pictorial halo and a religious halo. Why they liked
them so much—it’s clear that they took great pleasure in their halos.

The Byzantines were no strangers to halos—a halo really is something. A halo can be whatever
you want. It can be a fantastic burst of color, it can be a fantastical light source; halos have to do
with modulation. Okay, but primarily what are they? A halo is a certain state of a thing that
begins with Egypt, namely, the contour that’s independent of form. What comes to occupy it is
what’s left of a contour independent of form. The form of the head is lodged in the haloed
contour. The halo distinguishes between form and ground, though it might be on the same plane,
or sometimes there are different planes—at that point, while that’s changed, the independent
contour that relates form to ground and ground to form will live on in the halo.

And there, Bacon—it’s as if, in this age of atheism, the halo comes back to catch us by the foot.
Which would be breathtakingly insulting to any pious heart, a halo around the feet instead of
around the head, but it carries out the same principle of the independent contour. Now in what
sense is it modern in Bacon’s work? It’s particularly modern since all modern painting is at stake
in his work—how so? Because on close inspection, this figure, well, see, normally it would be a
case—we’ll come back to this later—of so-called thin depth, a thin depth achieved by something
other than perspective. But here that isn’t what matters—what does matter? Really, it’s the
separation of three elements.

To my knowledge, I think no living painter goes as far as Bacon does in keeping three pictorial
elements separated: figure, contour, ground. By transforming the entire ground into a field, by
isolating the figure and the contour as relating field-to-figure and figure-to-field onto what’s
presumably the same plane, or nearly the same plane. Okay, if this is modern painting, what

                                                                                                    23

about it is modern? It’s because you can easily see what ultimately interests him lies, through
these three elements, in the regimes of color. What matters here is a kind of—a certain way of
modulating color. More specifically, that there will be one modulation when it comes to the field,
a very different modulation with the figure, and lastly, the halo’s role, the contour’s role in
allowing for a sort of exchange between colors.

But obviously, that wasn’t the point for the Egyptians. But you could say that a painter like
Bacon revives the three elements of bas-relief, whether looking at a Bacon painting or when
reading Bacon’s interviews, you’ll happen upon a rather curious passage where Bacon says,
“I’ve been very much thinking about sculpture.” Well, this is interesting. He goes on, “Each time
I want to do it I get the feeling that perhaps I could do it better in painting. So, I gave up on
sculpture.”23 It’s fascinating. He literally says, I’d like to do sculpture, but I can’t make it work
since my ideas for sculpture have already been addressed in my painting. What’s happening
here?

Let’s go back to the Egyptians. A bas-relief is actually the transition between painting and
sculpture. Is colored bas-relief sculpture? Is it painting? It’s not paint on canvas, okay, but it is
mural painting. It’s really at the boundary between sculpture and painting. Indeed, there are
problems that painting and sculpture share in common. But their common ground lies precisely
in bas-relief—or at least some of their common ground lies in bas-relief.

As Bacon continues, he says, “Here is the sculpture I dream about.” He says, “There would be
three elements.” That’s not me messing with the text; that’s literally what he says.24 “There
would be three elements,” and he calls them “armature”—“the first element would be
‘armature,’” he says, “and then there would be the figure,” he says. Then he goes on: “I’d be able
to move the figures around on top of the armature.” Well, that’s something—he’d slide the figure
along the armature. He would slide it, right… See, but that specifically belongs to [the Egyptian
tradition?]; it’s really on the same plane; it slides. What would that be? By all accounts, the sort
of sculpture he’s describing works like a movable bas-relief, where the figures can slide on the
wall. And he says, “As a result, my figures would look like they’re rising out of pools.”25

And indeed, there’s a painting by Bacon that contains these three elements; it’s incredible.
There’s a sidewalk as the field, a sort of dog—like a really stocky, mean bulldog—coming out of
a pool, a pool of water or pee—I don’t know what it is, it doesn’t matter—but really, the figure
comes out of the pool and onto the field of the sidewalk. Anyway, there are three elements:
figure, ground/field, and contour, the pool. The contour becomes independent, and the figure
comes out of the pool onto the same plane as the field, and the pool relates the figure to the field,
the field to the figure.26

So how is he not Egyptian? It’s interesting that he tells us, “I couldn’t do sculpture because I had
already achieved [what I wanted to do] in painting. No, I won’t get anything else from
sculpture.” Sculpture is how he wanted to achieve it, but it’s through painting that he pulled it
off. In other words: he could no longer be Egyptian because no one can be Egyptian anymore. So
you have to make do with what you’ve got. Bas-relief, no matter what you do… of course, there
are painters who’ve returned to bas-relief. Does that reflect [someone coughs] a present-day will
to art? I can’t say. But it’s clear what it means. In what sense is Bacon Egyptian? I think it’s

                                                                                                  24

because he’s the modern painter whose Egyptian pictorial elements remain the most distinct
and—how to put this— “equiplanar,” on the same plane: the ground/field, the figure/essence,
and the independent contour.

Hence you see why—back to Riegl—you see why, in the authentically Egyptian world, that’s
fully realized in bas-relief: bas-relief, which minimizes shadows, modeling, depth, what else? --
I’m blanking -- overlapping figures, it keeps them to a minimum or even does away with them
altogether, with figures separated from each other, etc. … and everything related such that form
and ground are on the same plane. That’s what we’re calling geometric crystallinity. All right,
you follow me so far? Just one more thing. Okay, that’s how it goes with bas-relief. You’ll agree
that that works for bas-relief.

Okay, but what about the statues you can walk around? Statues aside, what then? What does all
this mean? Everything on the same plane. Their houses, their houses, were ultimately intended to
suppress volume. They were constantly trying to avoid volume because volume belongs to space,
the matrix of becoming, the matrix of that which changes. It’s shadow, it’s relief, it’s high relief,
it’s modeling, etc., etc. It runs counter to the world flattened out. No easy task to flatten the
world out, that’s Egypt’s accomplishment. They managed to do it. But anyway, then, how do you
get way from volume—outside of bas-relief? Riegl’s answer is great… He says: “When you get
right down to it, that’s what the pyramid is all about.” This part of Riegl is so nice. The pyramid
is an ingenious shape, ingenious because it exorcises… The cube! … [Interruption of the
recording] [2:06:23]

… It’s all there, everything about the cube: shadow, and maybe also light, modeling, the inside,
etc.–everything that can’t belong in a flat world. The cube is like the primary expression of
spatial relationships, of relations in space.

But we have to purge all spatial relations in order to translate them onto a single plane—which is
what the pyramid does for the cube. And what’s actually going on; how does the pyramid do
away with the cube? Well, consider the fact that pyramids are religious monuments; what do
they contain? They house a small burial chamber, the Pharaoh’s burial chamber. But looking at a
pyramid you wouldn’t know—couldn’t know—that it was made for a cube, and furthermore, it
wouldn’t make sense to say that it was. The pyramid is the process whereby the burial cube, the
cube of death, is hidden away, subtracted. It’s replaced, improved upon—the Rieglian concept of
improvement fully applies here—the pyramid improves upon it.

And what exactly is a pyramid? Instead of a cube, it presents you with one side unifying three
isosceles triangles, a well-defined surface unifying three isosceles triangles.27 Then, of course,
there’s this movement, this kind of slope, which is just the plane’s tribute to space, we’ll have
to… but which will be a way of transcribing spatial relationships as planimetric relationships.
And this is what the pyramid is all about: translating volume into surface relationships. Isn’t that
beautiful? Lovely, it’s a lovely thought.

As a result, on the contrary, you can draw out your little tune. By comparison, what is Greek
architecture? Greek architecture will be the explosion, the emancipation of the cube. Already that
opens, see, that opens up quite a few possibilities—you’ve done so well up to this point, so I’d

                                                                                                                25

like you to keep drawing it out yourselves. As Cézanne once said, “treat nature in terms of the
cylinder, the sphere...” Oh, what does he say? Shoot, I forgot the third… the cone! That’s it.
“Treat nature in terms of the cylinder, the sphere, and the cone, with everything put in
perspective.”28

Many scholars have remarked how mysterious it is that Cézanne left cubes off his list. It’s
interesting why he leaves cubes out. Because, when you think about Greek art, the answer is
simple. When you consider Greek art, the cubic form is the foundation for spatial relations. Even
for someone like Michelangelo, for example. The figure’s spatial coordinates form a cube. It’s
been that way ever since the Greeks. The character, the Greek temple is fundamentally cubic.
Well, then, if Cézanne comes along and excludes the cube, it’s because his primary concern lies
elsewhere. Not with the Egyptians, nor the Greeks, nor with the Renaissance, etc. Right, so we
have to appreciate how important that is.

But what is an Egyptian house? Their houses aren’t pyramids, right, but what are they? They’re
[like the bases] of pyramids, that is, it’s a house made of slanted trapezoids. And what’s the
decorative motif? The famous concave palmette. Really, the concave palmette is minimally
raised, as raised as it’s allowed to be. The plane will be on a slant. The pyramidal plane was a
slanted plane and one that called for, or had a decorative correlate in, palmettes or half-palms.

And again Riegl, in a particularly brilliant moment, tries to demonstrate how the palmette
undergoes a series of transformations in the Greek world—what do we get? We get something
totally different: acanthus leaves, the famous acanthus leaves on Greek temples. While from the
perspective of reproducing nature, you see why acanthus is very important. It’s a weed. What is a
weed doing in temple? If the goal was imitation, obviously the Greeks wouldn’t have chosen a
weed as tribute to the gods.

But what Riegl demonstrates beautifully is that qualms with representation aside, the acanthus
leaf is like a three-dimensional projection of the palmette. It’s great—this is from Problems of
Style; well, anyway. I’m just noting, this is where I’ll wrap things up—see, the significance of…
it’s not restricted to bas-relief; pyramids and Egyptian houses are equally motivated by what
Riegl characterizes as the Egyptian will to art: form and ground are presented and are taken up
on one and the same plane. As a result, the space particular to the Egyptians is one where form
and ground are on the same plane.

Our final point—the last point: what is… well what does… what does this signal-space look
like? What is it? What does it evoke in us? What in us corresponds to this signal-space? We’ll
see next time. That’s all. [Sounds of students; end of the session] [2:13:51]

Notes

  On the "aesthetic analogy”, see Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, trans. Daniel W. Smith (New York and
London: Continuum, 2003), pp. 115-116. On molding, see pp. 134-136.
  Deleuze refers here to considering Buffon and molds in session 11 of the Spinoza seminar, 17 February 1981.

                                                                                                                  26

  Deleuze refers to Buffon on this concept in Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, p. 134 and 192 note 20. The
reference is to Buffon’s Histoire naturelle des animaux in his Oeuvres complètes (Paris: 1885).
  In the seminar, Deleuze quotes Simondon as saying they’re “deux extrêmes d’une chaîne.” The closest equivalent
in L’Individu et sa genèse physico-biologique (Paris : Presses universitaires de France, 1964), p. 45, is when
Simondon writes: “Moulage et modulation sont les deux cas limites dont le modelage est le cas moyen,” (Molding
and modulation are limit cases, modeling being the average case). However, in Francis Bacon. The Logic of
Sensation, p. 192 note 20, he quotes Simondon as follows: in modulation “il n’y a jamais arrêt pour démoulage
parce que la circulation du support d’énergie équivaut à un démoulage permanent ; un modulateur est un moule
temporel continu … Mouler est moduler de manière définitive, moduler est mouler de manière continue et
perpétuellement variable", Simondon, pp. 41-42 (Smith translation: in modulation, "there is never time to turn
something out, to remove it from the mold [démoulage], because the circulation of the support of energy is the
equivalent to a permanent turning out; a modulator is a continuous, temporal mold. . . . To mold is to modulate in a
definitive manner, to modulate is to mold in a continuous and perpetually variable manner”, Francis Bacon. The
Logic of Sensation, p. 192 note 20).
  See the preceding note.
  Gregory Bateson, Naven: A Survey of the Problems suggested by a Composite Picture of a New Guinea Tribe
drawn from Three Points of View (1936; Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1965).
  As a gesture toward the difference between langue and langage—a difference with no comfortable English
equivalent— langue is translated as “spoken language,” with langage as “language.”
  In Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, Deleuze states, in chapter 13 on “Analogy”, that he borrows the analysis
on pp. 116-117 “from Richard Pinhas, Synthèse analogique, synthèse digitale (unpublished)”, p. 188 note 6, to
which Daniel Smith adds “A revised portion of this text has since appeared in Richard Pinhas, Les Larmes de
Nietzsche (Paris: Flammarion, 2001)”.
  According to David Lapoujade, Sur la peinture, Deleuze here says "rather than 1 and 0”, but the sounds from
Deleuze do not at all correspond to these two digits, hence leaving an unclear ending.
   Following David Lapoujade’s suggestion, we place in bracket these terms which the student has mistakenly
transposed, i.e., saying “verbs” first, “substantives” second, whereas the order is reversed, as we have done.
   Given the context of this discussion, it is likely that Comtesse’s disagreement is addressed to Querrien and not
Deleuze.
   For the most part, analogique remains here as “analog.” This makes sense when Deleuze is more clearly referring
to technology, the difference between digital and analog synthesizers for example. Let us note, however, that in
other contexts (such as when Comtesse brings up Bateson and Watzlawick earlier), there’s good reason to have
analogique as “analogic.” In fact, Watzlawick himself discusses the difference between so-called “digital” and
“analogic” language.
   Possibly the 1930s, with the development of binary code.
   A note on the phrase, “to plan.” A “modulation to plan” sounds too much like a “planned (future) modulation.” In
some contexts sur plan might be translated as “to spec,” as when something is manufactured according to
specifications. Deleuze’s wordplay is very difficult to preserve, however. Plan’s double meaning as “plan” or
“plane” allows him to move from talking about modulating “to plan” to talking about modulating the surface
(“plane”) of a canvas.
   The text reads, “Avec une seule goutte d’huile Titien peignait un bras d’un bout à l’autre; Cézanne a voulu au
contraire que tous ses passages soient des tons conscients.” From Pierre Bonnard’s comment to Tériade, published
in Verve 5 (1942) pp. 17-18. I did not get my hands on the original, but I found it quoted in Henri Maldiney’s
Regard, parole, espace (Lausanne: Editions l’Age d’Homme, 1994), p. 169 note 31.
   Deleuze’s brief comment on the literal translation of part of Riegl’s title: Kunstindustrie, is omitted The French
title is “Arts et métiers,” and Deleuze notes that a more literal translation of Kunstindustrie would be “art
industriel.” This comment doesn’t translate well into English because the wording of the English translation’s title
already has Kunstindustrie as “Art Industry.” In Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, Daniel Smith provides this
reference to Riegl’s book, Late Roman Art Industry, trans. Rolf Winkes (2nd edition; Rome: Giorgio Bretschneider
Editore, 1985).
   What Riegl calls Kunstwollen.
   For Deleuze’s corriger—to fix, correct, adjust --, the translation keeps with Jung’s translation of Riegl, with
“improve”, which is retained in keeping with Jung’s translation of Riegl.
   Sur le plan can also be interpreted to mean “in the plan,” “according to plan.”

                                                                                                                  27

   Given the end of the preceding paragraph, it is likely Deleuze means “Egyptian”, both for the clothing and bodies,
instead of “Greek” which he inserts.
   “Organism” in Jacqueline Jung’s translation of Riegl. See Jung’s preface to Aloïs Riegl, Historical Grammar of
the Visual Arts, trans. Jacqueline Jung, ed. Benjamin Binstock (New York: Zone, 2004), 45.
   An addition suggested by David Lapoujade’s transcription for Sur la peinture, based on the context.
   See David Sylvester, The Brutality of Fact: with Francis Bacon Interviews (New York: Thames and Hudson,
1987), p. 83, 114.
   No passage exactly like this is in David Sylvester’s Bacon interviews (pp. 83, 108) — presumably where these
comments come from—though an equivalent from various lines has been hobbled together. The passages here are
stitched together to convey the sense that Deleuze is reciting from memory—accurately, but not verbatim.
   Also noteworthy is that Bacon mentions “images” seeming to rise from pools of flesh. The word “figure” is
nevertheless preserved in this passage, in keeping with the use Deleuze makes of the term (see the previous notes for
source).
   The reference is to Bacon’s 1953 Man With Dog.
   To make sense of the “three isosceles triangles” that Deleuze mentions here is the reference to a relevant passage
from Riegl: “The architectural ideal of the ancient Egyptians is best expressed through the tomb-type of the
pyramid. Any of the four sides permits the beholder’s eye to observe an always unified plane of an isosceles
triangle, the sharply rising sides of which by no means reveal the connecting space behind.” Alois Riegl, Late
Roman Art Industry, trans. Rolf Winkes (Rome: Girgio Bretschneider, 1985), 27.
   This reference is from Conversations with Cézanne, ed. Michael Doran, trans. Julie Lawrence Cochran (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2001), pp. 178.