1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Spinoza: The Velocities of Thought

Lecture 05, 6 January 1981

Transcription (for Paris 8): Part 1, Thomas Harlay et Jean-Charles Jarrell, Part 2,
Véronique Delannay et Jean-Charles Jarrell, Part 3, Julien David & Jean-Charles Jarrell

Translation by Charles J. Stivale (duration, 2:24:51)

Part 1
Deleuze: … Well, a silence of marble1… [Laughter] So, we are continuing forward very gently
because, in order for you to follow your own reading… [Laughter] The very idea that this makes
you laugh is very, very disturbing… And today, I’d really like to go almost numerically, so that
you’ll understand the succession of problems. And so, I am saying, first, here we are… First, for
today, well… Necessarily, what point have we reached? This will go very quickly, the point
we’ve reached…
In the end, we’ve vaguely acquired, at the level… You see, over several meetings, we’ve been in
the process of looking into what is that status of modes, since the status of modes is really what
constitutes ethics. Good, and well, we are beginning to perceive, even a bit confusedly, a certain
status of what Spinoza calls modes, that is, you or me, or the table, or anything. That is, the mode
is what is. It’s “be-ing” (étant). The status of any “be-ing”, in the end, is what? Let’s imagine…
Because we still don’t know if this is true, everything that Spinoza is saying… It’s obvious that
it’s true! It’s so beautiful, so deep, it’s true! It can’t be otherwise; it occurs like he says, things…
And how does he say that it occurs? Well, he says that what constitutes a thing is, in the end, an
extremely complex aggregate of relations (rapports).2
I insist on the necessity of going slowly because at each sentence, we’d almost have say: Ah yes?
Well, yes, but it’s not all that great what he is saying there. That was already stated, all that…
[Deleuze does not complete this] And then, we do sense that it’s not true. What he concludes is
something absolutely new, something very, very odd. He says: you understand, a body, or a
thing, or anything, or an animal, or you, or me, each of us is constituted by an aggregate of
relations. Let’s call these relations: constitutive relations.3 I’m saying this out of convenience as
it’s not an expression he used, but I am saying: constitutive relations. These relations – we saw
this, and it was very vague – we baptized them according to Spinoza’s very expressions, but we
don’t yet know what this means: relations of movement and of rest, and of rest. And between
what are these relations established? [Between] relations implying terms. -- We are still
remaining entirely vague, for the moment. – [Spinoza] would say: between particles. For us, our
vocabulary has been enriched since then, so we could say: these are relations between molecules,
and then components of molecules, and finally, we’d also come upon “relations between
molecules.” We still don’t know at all where these particles come from. This we haven’t seen;

                                                                                                    2

we are proceeding in order. So, I am constituted by an aggregate of so-called constitutive
relations, relations of movement and rest that are established between particles.
What does that mean, an aggregate of relations? It means that my constitutive relations are mine,
and in what sense? There isn’t any “me” [moi] yet. What does “me” mean? So, what is going to
define the aggregate of constitutive relations of a particular thing as an aggregate “one”, when I
say a body? Here, we have no choice… To some extent what I am calling “my constitutive
relations” must never stop constituting each other, and decomposing each other, that is: they
never stop passing into one another in both directions, in the direction of a greater complexity,
and in the direction of an analysis, a decomposition. And if I can say these are my constitutive
relations, it’s because there is this mode of penetration of relations, of interpenetration of
relations such that my simplest relations never stop composing between them in order to form
my most complex relations, and my most complex relations never stop decomposing one another
to the benefit of the simple ones. There’s a kind of circulation that is going to define or that is
going to be defined by the aggregate of relations that constitute me.
I am choosing an example from one of Spinoza’s letters, not one to Blyenbergh, but a letter to
someone else; I believe that it’s letter 32, it’s the only page from Spinoza in which he… -- well,
it’s not 32… wait, yes it is 32 – It’s a text in which he goes quite far in analyzing relations. Yes,
it's 32, a letter to [Henry] Oldenberg.4 He takes the example of blood, and he says: Well,
classically, we say that blood has two parts, chyle and lymph. Today, we no longer say that, but
that’s not important. What 17th-century biology calls chyle and lymph isn’t what we call chyle
and lymph today, but that’s not serious. Generally, if you will, for a superficial analogy, let’s say
that chyle and lymph are sort of like white blood cells and red blood cells. So, fine, blood has
two components: chyle and lymph. Understand what that means. And on this point, Spinoza
explains… Well, I’d say: chyle and lymph are themselves two systems of relations between
particles. These are not simple bodies; there are no simple bodies. Simple bodies are particles,
that’s all. But when I qualify an aggregate of particles by saying: that’s some chyle and some
lymph, that mean’s I have already defined an aggregate of relations. So, chyle and lymph are
already two aggregates of relations. The one and the other are composed, the kind of natures that
they compose are in order form a third relation. This third relation is what I call “blood”.
So, if you will, blood will be a body of the second power, if I call chyle and lymph a body of the
first power – this is arbitrary because I am beginning there. – I’ll call chyle and lymph bodies of
the first power. They are each defined by a relation of movement and rest. These relations agree
(conviennent). You see what that means: two relations agree when one and the other are directly
composed. If they are directly composed, they compose a third, more complex relation. This
third, more complex relation we can call a “body of the second power.” This will be blood, my
blood. After all, my blood is not my neighbor’s.
In its turn, my blood, a body of the second power, is directly composed with other organic
elements. For example, with my tissues that, themselves, are also bodies, the tissues… They are
directly composed with tissues, tissue-bodies, in order to yield a body of the third power,
specifically: my irrigated muscles – on days that they happen to be! – Are you following me?

                                                                                                     3

Etc., etc. I can say that, at the extreme, I am a body of “n” powers. And what guarantees in the
end my duration? What guarantees my duration, that is, my persistence… For such a conception
of bodies implies that they are going to be defined by persistence. You already see where the
theme of duration can be concretely connected. It’s odd how all this really is quite concrete. This
is a very simple theory of the body, very certain of itself.
What is persistence? The fact that I persevere, persistence. I persevere in myself. I persevere in
myself to the extent that this aggregate of relations of relations that constitutes me is such that
the most complex relations never cease passing into the less complex one, and the less complex
ones never cease reconstituting the most complex ones. There’s a circulation of relations. And in
fact, they never cease being unmade and being remade. For example, I am taking up some very
elementary contemporary notions from biology; I never stop recreating bone. That is, bone is a
system of relations in movement and rest. You’ll tell me that we really don’t see this moving all
that much, except in voluntary movements. But yes, it does; it moves, it moves. It’s a system of
relations of movement and rest between particles.
But this relation never stops being undone. I borrow reserves from my bones; I borrow mineral
reserves from my bones all the time. We have to imagine bone in duration, but not in spatiality.
In spatiality, this is nothing; it’s a skeleton, it’s death. But bone in perseverance, in duration, is
simply this: it means that the relation of movement and rest between particles that bone
represents never ceasing to be unmade, specifically: I borrow mineral reserves from my bones in
order to survive, and being remade, notably: bones borrow nutriments that I absorb from mineral
reserves for reconstitution. So, the organism is a phenomenon of duration, much more than of
spatiality. And you see, for what I am going to call perseverance, or duration, at least I have a
first Spinozian, Spinozist definition of perseverance.
And this is why you will notice – here, I’m making a reference for those of you who followed
this moment – in the problems that [Georges] Comtesse had raised [during the 16 December
1980 meeting], I was saying: my progression would be to understand, once we’ve said that in
Spinoza’s works the expression “tendency to persevere in Being” constantly appears, I was
saying: I can only understand “tendency” as arising as a secondary conceptual determination.
The idea of perseverance in Spinoza is primary in relation to that of “tendency to persevere.”
How perseverance is going to become a “tendency to persevere”, it seems to me, is the way in
which we can pose the problem.
But if I had fully understood [that] – we’ll get back to this when I have finished all this – another
perspective can be Comtesse’s viewpoint in which he’d tend to say: ah well, no, in conatus, in
“tending to persevere”, what’s fundamental is “tendency”, and not “perseverance”. That might
be one very legitimate viewpoint for a reading that would yield a slightly different reading, I
suppose, not the opposite, but slightly different. But for me, if you will, this is how I see it – I
don’t know, to each his/her own mode of reading – I understand that in the expression “tending
to persevere in Being”, I understand “persevere” before having understood “tendency”. And I am
saying, “perseverance”, you indeed see that it’s… it’s as long as an organism lasts, however little
it lasts; it’s essentially the fact that it endures. And why does it essentially endure? Because it can

                                                                                                    4

only be defined by an aggregate of relations of movements and rest if these relations of
movements and rest never cease passing into each other, being decomposed and recomposed.
And that’s what perseverance is, this communication of relations.
So, this is still the point that we’ve reached. But on this topic, you understand that I have just
tried to define a kind of perseverance, or, I could say, a kind of “consistency” of each thing. I’d
say [that] each thing consists or perseveres to the extent that the relations constituting it never
cease passing into each other, that is, in being decomposed from the most complex to the
simplest, and in being recomposed from the simplest to the most complex. And there we are! All
at once, I have a certain autonomy concerning what I am calling “a thing”; I’ve defined the “a”
of “a thing.” In what way is a thing “a/one”? This, it seems to me, is an original definition of
“a/one”.
You see, in fact, why he has to say that, Spinoza? It’s for our joy that he does so! But why does
he have to? He has no choice, in a certain way since by defining things, beings, “be-ings”
(étants) as modes, he has blocked off considering them as substances. So, he cannot define their
unity, the unity of each thing, in a substantial way. So, as an outcome, he’s going to define
[unity] as a system of relations, that is, the opposite of a substance. And his strength is managing
so simply, really with a great sobriety, a great simplicity, to tell us what “a/one” might mean at
the level of an aggregate of multiple relations. Each thing is constituted through an aggregate of
multiple relations. “Ah, fine! But how is it ‘a/on’?” This isn’t difficult; [it’s] a very strict and
very rigorous answer: its relations never cease passing into one another, that is, in being
decomposed and recomposed. This is how the “a/one” is made of “a thing.”
You see why is Spinoza forced to do this. It is for our joy that he does all this. He has no choice
since, by defining things, beings, as modes, he has forbidden himself from considering them as
substances. Therefore, he cannot define the unity of each thing in a substantial way. As a result,
he defines it as a system of relations, that is, the opposite of a substance. And his strength is to
arrive so simply, truly with great sobriety, great simplicity, at telling us what one can mean at the
level of a set of multiple relations. Each thing is constituted by a set of multiple relations. "Oh
really! But in what way is it one?" This is not difficult, [having] a very strict and rigorous
answer: its relations never cease passing into one another, that is, decomposing and recomposing
themselves. That is what makes the "a/one" of "a/one thing".
And so, and so, and so, still within this first point, what point have we reached? But this thing
bathes within a milieu that is itself modal, not substantial, a modal milieu of other things. There
are other things; there isn’t just one thing. Why isn’t there just a single mode? You’ve already
guessed it: it’s because if there were just a single mode, this would be substance. If there were a
single “be-ing,” this would be Being. There has to be more than a single “be-ing”; there have to
be modes, an infinite infinity of modes, since Being is said of the substance… Oh, excuse me:
Being is said of “be-ing”, Being is said of the mode. But the mode is multiple. So, there are other
things, and there are some of these other things that are completely foreign to me, with which I
have no dealing, but there are some that act upon me. And these other things are exactly like me:
for their own account, they also are systems of relations that pass into one another, which is the

                                                                                                     5

way in which the thing, each thing, perseveres. That each thing perseveres is true of all. This
isn’t just about organisms; it’s true of all: the table perseveres. The table also is a system of
relations of movements and rest that pass into one another, which is the way in which I am
saying “a” table. Fine… So, there are other things that act upon me.
And well, among these things, from my point of view – you see what “my point of view” means’
what is my point of view? Why can I speak about my point of view? – We are going to define
my point of view: it’s the point of view of my perseverance. That is, my point of view is the
point of view of the aggregate of relations that compose me and that never cease being
decomposed within one another and of each being recomposed with the other. That’s what my
point of view is. From my point of view, I’ll say that certain of these exterior things are good for
me – are good, or are good for me, it’s the same – and that others are bad for me. Or, with a word
still used by Spinoza, that certain of them suit me (me conviennent), and that others disagree with
me. My mode of living is: “Hey, that suits me… Ah no, that thing disagrees with me.”
But what does that mean? These aren’t judgments of taste, “that suits me, that disagrees with
me”. What is a “bad” thing? A “bad” thing is a thing in which the relation decomposes all or part
of my constitutive relations. [Pause] That is, it forces my particles to take on an entirely different
relation that doesn’t correspond to my aggregate. There you have “bad,” it’s poison! I have the
model of poison, here, from the start: poison decomposes one of my constitutive relations; it
destroys one of my constitutive relations, and in this way, it is “bad”.
You see that, already, one must say, Ah, well yes, we are taking “to decompose” in two senses,
since from the point of view of perseverance, the relations that constitute me never cease
decomposing and recomposing. But that means: the complex relation passes into the simple
relations, and the simple relations again yield the complex relation. Whereas the other [sense of]
decomposition, when poison acts on me, there we have a decomposition of a completely
different type, notably: one of my relations is destroyed, or else at the extreme, all of my
relations are destroyed. That is, my particles take on completely different relations. [Pause] In
other words, I get sick, or I die.
So, we have a rather strict definition, even very strict, of “bad”. [Something] is bad… A thing
can be said to be bad only from a certain point of view, that is, from the point of view of the
body whose relation a thing decomposes. So, when Spinoza said: “Ah well, this isn’t difficult;
God didn’t forbid absolutely anything from Adam. God simply revealed to Adam that if Adam
ate of the fruit, Adam would be poisoned.” You see what that means in all Spinozist rigor. That
means: God revealed to Adam that if he ate of the fruit, one of his relations, or even all of his
constitutive relations, would be decomposed. He would no longer be the same Adam. He’d no
longer be the same… Like when we undergo an ordeal, or when we’ve consumed a violent
poison, and then we say, “Ah no! I won’t be the same anymore!” Now there we have something
that’s bad!
And you suddenly understand what it means to be “good”. The good will be attributed to each
thing of which one or several relations compose themselves directly – I insist on the importance
of “directly” – directly with mine, directly or with few intermediaries. [Pause] For example, here

                                                                                                       6

– but perhaps this example will direct us to another, into a subtler analysis later – I breathe, the
air is good for me. First, what air? What air? Well, that depends. Let’s say, overall, the air is
good for me. What does that mean? It means that the constitutive relation of the air composes
itself – I am putting “directly” in quotes – with one of my constitutive relations. What does that
mean? In fact, it’s not as simple as that. But you see, nonetheless, what this means… This is so
that you feel what “directly” means. This isn’t that simple because what is my constitutive
relation in question, in relation to air? It’s the constitutive relation that is going to define my
lungs.
In relation to air, this constitutive relation, this relation that I am calling out of convenience
“pulmonary”, this is a system of relations of movements and rest between particles. And well,
the lungs breathe, and this means they decompose the constitutive relation of air. Why do they
decompose it? In order to appropriate for themselves the part of air that suits them, let’s say, so
as not to complicate this, oxygen. If I am a fish and I have bronchi, this occurs with water, since
it’s water that suits me. Because the bronchi are another system of relations of movements and
rest that is capable of decomposing the constitutive relation of water in order to extract oxygen
from it. But myself, I am not able to. Moreover – here we see that things are extremely
individual – everything depends on the state of your lungs. Can you stand a kind of air strongly
containing oxygen, with a great proportion of oxygen? There are cases in which you cannot stand
this. What does that mean, too much oxygen? Too much oxygen is going to be something
strange. It means that in a kind of air too loaded with oxygen, you cannot make – in certain
cases, I am saying in certain cases – you cannot make your extraction. You see, this is a whole
world of modes that is extremely varied.
But you see what “good” means, in general. What is “bad” is that for which the relation
decomposes in the most direct way possible one of my relations. What is “good” is that for
which the relation is composed the most directly possible, rather directly, with one of my
relations. Very good. The difference between nutriment and poison is there. Arsenic let’s say – I
am returning to this example, since there is a text by Spinoza on fruit that acts as poison, another
text on blood – Take a poison that decomposes blood. We see how it acts. I was saying, in the
state of health, you have chyle-lymph that never stops composing blood, and blood never
stopping to decompose into chyle-lymph, and chyle-lymph recomposing blood. Very good.
When you absorb a poison that decomposes blood, there you have the constitutive relation of
blood: it’s destroyed! For example, an excess of white blood cells, whatever you wish…
Anyway… You can invent your own examples.
So, there we are. All this has to be extremely clear because if it isn’t quite clear, then it’s…
[Deleuze does not finish] But this is only the summary of where we had arrived on the status of
mode. You see, it’s quite strong to define a thing as a… really, as a complex of relations. You
will tell me: in some ways this goes without saying. This goes without saying, but this implies
such a choice. You understand, the whole idea in the back of our minds, notably “the others”, all
that exists as implied. Other philosophers believed that they could only define the individual as
substantial. And Spinoza tells us: well, not at all; the individual is not a substance. There, from
Aristotle to Descartes, there is at least one point in common. They all differ over understanding

                                                                                                   7

and defining substance, but from Aristotle to Descartes, the agreement is total – including
Leibniz after Descartes. Up to Leibniz, traditional philosophy’s agreement – I’m not saying there
weren’t some strange thinkers who had already brought this point into question – considered that
we could only define a body with reference to the category of substance, an individual only by
substance.
A student: And for Spinoza, can we say that substance or substrata support relations, relations…
Deleuze: No!
The student: … or else that relations are interior to substance?
Deleuze: No, neither one nor the other. In my view, neither one nor the other. No. There has to
be a completely original form of relation, which will be the relation of substance and of modes.
But we can only look at that when we pass over into the topic of ontology, since there, it’s ethics.
Yes, that’s a good question, what will the relation of substance and modes be? But that exceeds
by far what I’m currently [saying].
A student: [Inaudible]
Deleuze: [Letter] 32. On blood, yes… Yes, a very beautiful letter, in which he talks about the
unity of Nature since, at the extreme, there’s only one and same Nature, Nature being the infinity
of relations that pass into one another. So, that is what Nature is, with a capital N.
Good. I am passing on to my second point. This will go quickly. I just said: there are two kinds
of decomposition when I say, “a relation is decomposed”. There is a decomposition-circulation
that never ceases being decomposed, at the same time that my simple relations never cease
recomposing complex relations. So, this is a decomposition-recomposition that belongs to
perseverance. This is a decomposition-circulation. But we saw that when I say: “poison
decomposes one of my relations,” it’s no longer a matter of that at all. It’s a matter of
decomposition-destruction. One of my relations is destroyed by the constitutive relation of
poison. For example, my blood is defined by a relation, so well… There we are! Do you follow
me?
What does it mean, “a relation is destroyed”? Eh? What does that mean? Well, it’s quite funny in
Spinoza; it’s… He doesn’t say it, but it’s as if he said it. There are things, you have to know
them by heart. It would be good to learn the Ethics by heart. Learn it by heart! [Laughter] Yes! If
there are texts that we learn by heart, if there are any of them in philosophy, it’s the Ethics.
Learning Kant by heart makes no sense! It would be useless. Learning Spinoza by heart, that will
serve you throughout your life. You tell yourself, in every life circumstance, you tell yourself,
“ah good… what proposition does this refer to?” And there will always be one, in Spinoza! So,
that can be enormously useful for you.
So, fine! One of my relations is destroyed, so what does that mean? Quite rigorously, that means
the following: how can a relation be destroyed? After all, I don’t see… And in fact, here we are
nonetheless going to make a very important comment, perhaps. A relation… What can be
destroyed is the terms of a relation. But where is a relation? How could it be destroyed? Where is

                                                                                                       8

a relation? If I say: Pierre is smaller than Paul, this is a relation; “Pierre is smaller than Paul”, eh?
I indeed see that Pierre or Paul can be destroyed, assuming they are themselves not relations.
But, “smaller than”, how could this be destroyed, something like that? How could a relation be
destroyed?
You see, this is an abyss… [Pause] A relation cannot be destroyed. Why is it that a relation
cannot be destroyed? There’s a very simple answer: it’s because, like each of you knows and
lives this, a relation, a relation is an eternal truth. An eternal truth cannot be destroyed… 2 + 2 =
4 is a relation. 2 + 2 = 4 is a complex of relations, since 2 + 2 = 4 is the affirmation that there is a
relation of equality between two relations: the relation 2 + 2 and the relation 4. So, this is a
relation between two relations. That cannot be destroyed! Eternal truths are indestructible! Pierre
and Paul can die, but the fact still remains no less eternally true that Pierre will have been smaller
than Paul.
So, what can that mean? Something very simple: that necessarily means – It’s out of convenience
that we say that a relation is destroyed, it’s a way of speaking; we really have to speak this way,
otherwise we’d get bogged down – But, in reality, this means, “a relation stops being realized”.
It's not destroyed; it stops being realized. This is very important for what Spinoza will call
“eternal life,” when he teaches us that we are eternal. What I am in the process of saying is
therefore uniquely in order introduce a particular topic about eternity. In fact, when I say, “one of
my relations is destroyed,” that solely means and cannot mean anything other than: one of my
relations has stopped being realized.
What does it mean to realize a relation? Realizing a relation, this is very simple: a relation is
realized when are present, when the terms are presented between which the relation is
established with truth. If I say, “smaller than”, I have stated a relation, but this is an empty
relation. I realize the relation when I find or present two terms that are, the one and the other, in
the relation conforming to the relation “smaller than.” This is why we can create a logic of
relations. A logic of relations has always been considered as being distinct from what is called a
logic of attribution, the logic of attribution being the relation of quality in substance. I say, “the
sky is blue,” at first glance – I am not certain that there is a logic of attribution; maybe there isn’t
one – But, at first glance, when I say, “the sky is blue”, I attribute a quality or a predicate to a
subject. The subject is the sky; blue is the quality, or the predicate. And how can I say, “the sky
is blue”? Here, this is the problem of the logic of attribution.
What does that mean, “how can I say, ‘the sky is blue’”? It means that it doesn’t go without
saying. In a certain way, when I say, “the sky is blue”, I am saying “A is B”. It’s strange; how,
by what right can I say, “A is B”? This is a problem. I mean that all sorts of logics are logics of
attribution, to the extent that this is indeed the problem that they pose. But understand that when
I say, “Peter is smaller than Paul,” “smaller than” is not one of Pierre’s quality. The proof is that
Pierre who is smaller that Paul is larger than Jules. The relation is not a quality attributable to the
thing. Even at the level of feeling, you indeed sense that this is another domain, the domain of
relations. Hence, the possibility of a logic of relations has never ceased historically, in the history

                                                                                                          9

of the logics and of philosophy, has never ceased historically teasing, tormenting the logic of
substance or of attribution.
What do we do about relations from the point of view of a logic of substance? This means that
relations are going to pose problems… Once again, I cannot say that “smaller than Pierre” is an
attribute or a quality of Paul. This is something else. Irreducibility of relations and of qualities…
It’s a drama! Henceforth, what do we think? This is what struck a great blow against what could
be called substantialism. You understand, on the contrary, that Spinoza would be particularly at
ease within a logic of relations since, precisely, he hasn’t defined bodies as substance.
When I have defined bodies as substance, I find myself facing one hell of a problem. How do we
think about relations between bodies? At least, Spinoza took upon himself some very strange
problems by rejecting that bodies are substances, but as a result, he avoids certain problems.
Relations for him are, on the contrary, the domain that goes the most without saying. We are
packets of relations; each of us is a packet of relations. So, he’s not one to be astonished by
relations.
Once again, henceforth, “one of my relations is destroyed,” which means, “it stops being
realized”. What realizes my relations? We saw the answer, still quite insufficient since I have not
analyzed this – and it’s not for today that I’ll be analyzing that. -- In any case, [Spinoza] tells us
something for the moment as vague as: what realizes relations, in any case, are particles, more or
less complex particles. And what are these particles? You sense then that these are nothing other,
at the extreme, than relational supports (supports de relations). Obviously, the particles don’t
have an interiority; they are uniquely relational supports, relational terms, variable relational
terms. As a result, we could almost create a very formal logic of the relation in Spinoza. But, in
the end, this would be something else…
Well, well, what does that mean? Some particles that realized one of my relations are no longer
realizing it. What can that mean? This becomes quite clear! They no longer realize it, obviously,
obviously that they no longer realize it. Why do they no longer realize it? They no longer realize
it because they have been determined to return under another relation, incompatible with mine.
So, they no longer realize my relation; they have taken up another one. And the new relation that
they have taken is not compatible, that is, does not circulate with mine. Example: once again,
arsenic. Arsenic decomposes my blood. Fine, what does that mean? The particles of my blood,
that constituted my blood insofar as they entered into a particular relation – the constitutive
relation of my blood, which itself was a relation of movement and rest between particles --, well,
there we see that under arsenic’s action, these particles are determined to take on another
relation. And, the new relation that they have taken on does not circulate with mine, does not
compose themselves with mine. And I can say, “Oh, my God, I no longer have any blood!”
Shortly after, I die. I’ve eaten an apple. You see…
Fine; this second comment had the sole purpose of saying, “Careful!” What does it mean, “a
relation is destroyed”? Well, that doesn’t prevent relations from having eternal truths. But “a
relation is destroyed” means that it is no longer realized. There are no longer any particles to
actualize the relation, that is, to furnish terms for the relation. Actualizing the relation, realizing

                                                                                                     10

the relation, means furnishing terms for the relation, entirely relative terms, since these terms
will be relations in their turn, but other sorts of relations. As a result, every relation is a relation
of relations to infinity, the terms being simply the terms relative to a particular level of relation.
This is a beautiful vision, a beautiful vision of the world! Substance is missing here, precisely, no
more substance in this. There we have my second point. So, when I say out of convenience “one
of my relations is decomposed or destroyed”, there’s no longer any problem. I’ll say this out of
convenience because it’s faster than saying “this relation is no longer realized through particles.”
Fine, this is ok up to this point, right? Up to this point, it’s crystal clear. Very good!
My third comment; this is going to get complicated. This is going to get complicated, and it’s not
my fault; it’s necessary for this to get complicated. It has to get complicated because I am
returning to my point of view: what defines my perseverance is the aggregate of communications
of relations, notably between my constitutive relations; these never cease communicating. And
“these never cease communicating” means that these never cease being decomposed from the
most complex to the simplest and being recomposed from the simplest to the most complex. I
never cease unmaking my bones and recreating them. There’s a bony chronology that’s much
more important than the bony spatiality.
Well, what does this imply? This system of perseverance or of consistency, what does this
imply? It’s in this that something funny is implied because – I’m opening a parenthesis – You
remember that, in the long introduction that I presented to situate this problem, I spoke of one of
Spinoza’s doctrines, parallelism [in the 2 December 1980 session], and I said some very simple
things about parallelism -- I didn’t want to consider it for itself – I said some very, very
elementary things of the kind: well, you understand, a body is a mode of an attribute of
substance, this attribute of substance being extension. A body is a mode of extension.
And you and me, or even all the things that we know, according to Spinoza, we aren’t only
bodies. In fact, we are dual modes. We are also souls. And what does that mean, a soul? For
Spinoza, it’s not difficult, a soul: it’s a mode of thought. A body is a mode of extension; a soul is
a mode of thought. And we are indissolubly body and soul. Spinoza is even going so far as to
say, “each thing is animated”, that is, each body has a soul.
What does that mean, each body has a soul? It means that for each mode of body-extension
corresponds a mode of soul-thought. So, I am a body in extension, but I am a soul in thought,
and thought is an attribute of God no less than extension is an attribute of God. Thus, I am soul
and body. You see, you see, as a parenthesis, Spinoza’s very beautiful vision, notably, there is no
problem of the union of soul and body. Why? Because soul and body are strictly the same thing,
under two different attributes. Soul and body are the same modification, in two modes. Soul and
body are the same modification of substance, in two modes of different attributes. They are
distinguished through the attribute, but this is the same modification. I will call “soul” a
modification referring to the attribute “thought” and “body” the same modification referring to
the attribute “extension”. Hence, [we have] the idea of a parallelism of soul and body. What the
body expresses within the attribute “extension,” the soul expresses it within the attribute
“thought”.

                                                                                                   11

If you understand this even in the slightest, hardly do we understand… That’s what’s so joyous
in life: it means that as soon as we understand something, as soon as we’ve avoided a
misunderstanding, we risk falling into another misunderstanding. [Laughter] For hardly have we
understood this -- that, for Spinoza, soul and body were the same thing, and that body and soul
expressed strictly the same thing – and we run the risk of having difficulties all over again.
Because we almost want to say: Ah, fine, well since a body is defined through an aggregate of
relations of movement and rest, a soul also will have relations of movement and rest… [Pause]
Listen to me closely: we really want to say that! Moreover, Spinoza says it sometimes. He says it
sometimes: “Well yes indeed, there are parts of the soul as there are parts of the body, and the
parts of the soul enter into relations entirely like parts of the body enter into relations.” And he
was right to say this because one has to speak as simply as possible. There are moments in which
one has to speak like that, when this isn’t exactly the problem that is being posed. This goes
faster; this allows us better to outline another problem. But seriously, in all rigor, why can he not
say this? To the point that even if he says it… [Deleuze does not finish] So indeed, we are not
going to allow ourselves to correct Spinoza and say: here, he’s wrong, he’s wrong about his own
thought. I am saying something entirely different. I am saying: he can seem to be saying that, but
he doesn’t really say it. He might seem to be saying that for a very simple reason: it’s in order to
go faster because the real problem he poses within that text is another problem. But, in fact, he
cannot say it in all rigor, for a very simple reason – here, you should already provide me the
answer in advance – he cannot say it for a very simple reason: it’s that movement and rest are
modes of extension. These belong to extension. Moreover, I can speak of a movement of the
soul, but this is through metaphor… The soul’s business is not movement. Movement and rest
are a pulsion of bodies.
So, I can say – understand me – I can say: by virtue of parallelism, there must be something
within thought that is, to thought, what movement and rest are to extension. But I cannot say:
there is a movement and rest within thought as there is a movement and rest within extension.
For movement and rest are not said of thought; this is said of extension. In all rigor, I cannot
conclude about movement and rest, about relations of movement and rest such as they are
presented within bodies situated within extension, I cannot conclude about them, infer about
them, that there are therefore also movements and rest, relations of movement and rest within the
soul that is situated within thought. So, even if he says it, even if he seems to say it, he only says
it in jest – in the end, you understand me – in order to go quickly when this isn’t the problem.
When it is the problem, he indeed must say something else.
And what is he going to be able to say? Well, he tells us something very interesting. For I find in
the book… [Pause] Which book? In the Ethics, book II, proposition 13, scholium (the section is
called scholium), I read this: [Pause] “I will say generally” – he specifies – “I say generally,”
this is a general proposition. What does he say generally? “I say generally that the more a body is
suited in relation to others for being active or passive…”, “the more a body is suited in relation
to others for being active or passive…” Grant me that this means: the more a body is suited to be
with others, in relations – with other bodies – in relations of movement and rest. That is, the
more a body is suited to undergo the effects of another body and to be the cause of an effect on

                                                                                                  12

other bodies. I am active if I act on another body; I am passive if I received the action of another
body.
So, according to what we’ve seen, this aptitude for being active or passive is exactly the aptitude
that I have for entering into relations with exterior bodies, relations of movement and rest. Thus,
I can transform the sentence without any basic modification: I am saying, in general, that the
more a body is apt to have relations of movement and rest with other bodies… “The more its
mind (esprit)”, the more its mind, that is, its soul… The more its mind… -- in fact, for Spinoza,
these are identical terms; he prefers to use the Latin term “mind”, mens, rather than the term
anima – The more a body is apt to be active or passive, that is, to have relations with others, “the
more its mind is apt in relation to other minds to…”, he doesn’t say to be active or passive; he
says, “to form perceptions of several things all at once”, to form perceptions of several things all
at once. Here, we have a true problem, it seems to me… [Pause]
He tells us formally: that which corresponds to action-passion within the body – or if you prefer,
movement-rest… Within the soul, what is this? This is not even action-passion; this is
“perception”. In all rigor, the more a body… – and this, I believe that it’s truly the basis (fond)
here, I believe that Spinoza is saying the basis of his thought – what corresponds to the aggregate
of actions and passions of a body within extension are the perceptions of the soul. So, what
corresponds to relations of movement and rest within the body are perceptions of the soul. All at
once, we tell ourselves: fine, what is happening? What does that mean?
You see, parallelism doesn’t place into relation movement and rest within extension and
movement and rest within the soul, but movement and rest within extension – movement and rest
being modes of extension – and perception within the soul. As a result, parallelism has nothing to
do with a… -- Already, we have more choice, that’s what is so good – Parallelism has nothing to
do with the way in which we usually interpret it, when we think that there are movements of the
soul that correspond to movements of the body.
Spinoza doesn’t say that at all. What corresponds to movements of the body are perceptions.
You’ll tell me: but these perceptions are in movement. Perhaps that will allow us to provide a
meaning to a movement proper to the soul, perception… But this is because these are perceptions
first. These are not movements first; these are perceptions. That there’s a dynamism of
perception is something else.
So… But at the same time, I imagine, someone could make an objection to me about this: but
what are you up to… in meddling with this text? Because the text seems to say something very
simple: “The more my body has relations of movements and rest, through which it enters into
relation with exterior bodies, the more it perceives things.” Someone will tell me: this is very
simple. This is so simple; this is so simple. That means, well necessarily so, when a body has an
effect on mine, I perceive the exterior body. This isn’t more complicated than that, and then,
what’s the big deal (et après)? This is obvious. The table acts on me; I bump against it; I knock
into the table; I perceive the table as colliding with me. Fine, where is the problem? And well,
fine, good, the problem is there… What corresponds to a movement-rest within the body, once
again, this is a perception within the soul.

                                                                                                   13

Well, this seems so simple, but no! Because this is like earlier, if I have complex relations from
the point of view of my body, this is also because I have very simple relations. The complex
relation is composed through simpler relations, etc., to infinity. There is a system of circulation.
If I have global perceptions that correspond to complex relations, notably, “I perceive the table,”
I really must have some elementary perceptions, or simpler ones. What are these elementary
perceptions and simpler ones? There will have to be a circuit of communication of perceptions
between them, and this circuit of communications will define perseverance in the soul.
What do I mean? Pay attention even more closely, and we are going to rest after, because you are
wiped out. Well, sense what this means… Let’s return to blood. And then we will see that it’s
indeed a question of something else than perception in the ordinary sense of the term. Chyle and
lymph have relations that suit them. What does it mean, “chyle and lymph have relations that suit
them”? That means that these relations are directly composed. For what reason are they directly
composed? In order to constitute a third relation: blood. [Pause] Fine… All these relations
insofar as I persevere are realized through particles. If they stopped being realized, I would be
destroyed, and my blood would be destroyed. Fine… Imagine an instant, you are a lymph
particle. That means [that] you realize a relation, or you enter into realization of a relation which
is directly composed with the relation that the particles of chyle realize – or the opposite, I no
longer know what I’m saying. Do you follow me?
What does that imply? It’s that chyle has a power to discern lymph, lymph has a power to
discern chyle. The particles of chyle and the particles of lymph are united to constitute blood.
How would they be united if they didn’t distinguish one another? If chyle had no power of
discernment, what would prevent these particles from being united with particles of arsenic,
whereas arsenic destroys the constitutive relation of chyle? The particles of chyle and the
particles of lymph must have a power of reciprocal discernment… [Interruption of the
recording; end of cassette] [1:01:59]

Part 2
Here we must indeed endow all particles, however small they may be, with a certain power that I
call – this is convenient – a power of perception. When two relations are composed, the particles
that realize this relation must, under this relation, have the power of discerning the other particles
of the other relation with which the first relation is composed. The result of this discernment is
that particles of lymph and chyle will go seeking each other out, if nothing prevents them
[Pause] from joining and composing the blood relation.
In other words, a discernment in thought responds to the particles in extension. The particles,
however humble they might be, particles of oxygen, hydrogen, etc. – Spinoza is elaborating a
very prodigious chemical thought – the particles are modes of bodies, are modes of extension,
granted. Modes of thought are perceptions. Every particle is animated; every particle has a soul;
what is the soul of a particle? Is Spinoza here goofing around (déconner), getting delirious, with
“everything has a soul”? What does he mean? He means something extremely rigorous,

                                                                                                        14

something very, very positivist; I don’t know if it’s true. We’ll see later; we’re going to try to
situate this.
But, in any case, he means something very rigorous when he says that everything has a soul. This
means: each body, however simple that it might be, even the most elementary particle, you
cannot separate it from a power of discernment that constitutes its soul. For example, a hydrogen
particle combines with an oxygen particle, or else two hydrogen particles combine with an
oxygen particle. No doubt, chemical affinities are the simplest case of molecular discernment.
There is a molecular discernment. Well, molecular discernment is what you’ll call a perception,
just as you call “mode of extension” molecular movement and rest. Molecular movement and
rest are only possible in extension to the extent that, at the same time, a discernment in thought is
exerted. Everything is animated; every particle has a soul, that is, each particle discerns. A
hydrogen particle doesn’t confuse, literally, doesn’t confuse an oxygen particle with a carbon
particle. This is the basis of chemistry.
So, I insist on this because here I am sure that I’m right. This is not at all… Spinoza’s thought is
not at all geometric; I believe strongly that it’s a thought… It’s not even a thinking [like] physics
(une pensée physique). Each time that I read his theory of bodies, I really get the impression of a
chemical or pre-chemical thinking. This is why in his letters, for those among you who… What
would confirm, what would support me factually in saying this, is that in his letters, he has a very
long correspondence with a great chemist of the era; he is enormously interested in the chemical
composition of the body. You will see; this is a series of letters with an English chemist named
[Robert] Boyle, where he speaks considerably of the composition of saltpeter. How is saltpeter
constituted, and what is it that creates…, what is a saltpeter particle?
So, in short, I’d say that discernment responds to movement-rest on the side of the body, and it is
discernment that constitutes the thing’s soul. You see, this becomes quite simple, saying “every
particle, however small it might be, has a soul”; this solely means: within extension, [the soul]
moves, it receives movement, and it yields movements; it’s in movement, and in this way, even
in thought, it is in perception, it’s in a state of discernment. In other words, how would we say
what this is today? No doubt, we’d say lots of things. We could say that it is potentialized, that
it’s valorized, that it has valences. That’s what the soul is: it has potentialities, it has affinities. Or
even, we would emerge from the domain of chemical affinities in order to say what?
Here, today, I am insisting, and I only do so with considerable repugnance, because I do not at all
want to say that Spinoza anticipated things that he couldn’t have anticipated. The precursor
theme, lots of people have already stated this, the precursor theme is one of the most dangerous
themes ever, and in fact, we realize each time that this is complicated. You know, above all we
must not succumb to the idea, “Ah! Evolutionism! It was already present in Empedocles, etc.”
These are stupidities in the end. This is not at all what I mean.
But, on the other hand, if I think that, in fact, there are never any precursors, that it’s completely
idiotic to try finding people who might have already proposed a kind of evolutionism before
Darwin, etc., on the other hand, I strongly believe that a phenomenon occurs in the history of
thought that is very, very odd: that someone, with some determined means – in Spinoza’s case,

                                                                                                  15

with concepts – discovers something in his era, which in another domain will only be discovered
much later and with completely different means. As a result, he isn’t at all a precursor. But there
are phenomena of resonances, and resonance doesn’t only occur between different domains
during the same era. That can occur between a domain, for example, in the seventeenth century
and a domain in the twentieth century.
For, in fact, according to what I am saying, Spinoza fully participates in a theory that – he isn’t
the only one to support it – this theory of minute perceptions, molecular perceptions. Leibniz,
Spinoza’s contemporary, will create an admirable theory, and one that’s much more developed,
much more explicit than Spinoza’s, concerning minute perceptions or molecular perceptions.
[Pause] Fine… And this, they create this with their philosophical concepts, their mathematical
concepts, their chemical concepts of the era. They are not precursors in the least. But I am saying
that today, in the twentieth century, an absolutely different domain: we are informed – and we’re
almost spared nothing about this – about this relatively recent discipline, molecular biology. And
molecular biology is famous for its use of a certain information science model. And what does
that mean today – so, I’m opening a parenthesis with all this – What does “information science
model” in molecular biology mean today? The genetic code is interpreted in terms of
information. And in this case, what receives information? What transmits information? The
genetic code contains what is called “information” in quotes. This [information] is transmitted
through certain protein-type bodies. This [information] is received by bodies, by molecules, etc.,
that are composed, that compose more and more complex aggregates based on this information.
What does this informative, informational conception of the genetic code imply? It implies this:
that at several levels, there is – and this is the very word used by certain authors today – a power
of discernment of molecules. Power of discernment goes quite far. Because sometimes it’s
chemical: a molecule discerns the molecule with which it has chemical affinities. But, sometimes
the power of “election-discernment” overflows the chemical affinity, and the entire current
theory of enzymes – you see, enzymes, such an important thing from the point of view of genetic
code – the enzymes are bodies or substances -- well finally, not substances, so we might remain
Spinozist – they are bodies that literally choose something, as is said, a body that is going to be
used as their substratum – it matters little in what sense this is taken --: enzyme, substratum. I am
taking this solely as an abstract example. And the enzyme has the power to discern its
substratum. Moreover, this power of discernment is extraordinary since between two bodies
called isomers, let’s say between two bodies that are extremely close to each other chemically,
the enzyme always elects only one, one of the two isomers and not the other. That’s odd, this
power of discernment that corresponds to the particle’s action.
I’d imagine that Spinoza would say, this is what he’d call the soul. A particle’s power of
discernment is the soul, or its mind (esprit). This isn’t important; we can call it something else.
We can call it information, for example, why not? That wouldn’t be awkward; Spinoza wouldn’t
mind at all calling that information. This has no importance. At the era, it was called soul; it’s a
question of words, you understand.

                                                                                                    16

But, don’t remember Spinoza as this author that talks to you about soul because readers of his
era, who said, that Spinoza, what a strange guy, he’s completely materialist, so obviously,
Spinoza answered, as a countermove: “Listen, open my book; I never stop talking about the soul
or the mind…” -- Obviously he had an interest in not getting noticed – But what matters is not if
someone is talking about the soul or the mind; what matters is what he places beneath the word. I
can make declarations about God and still get burned; this is even what happened during the
Renaissance, generally. People never stopped talking about God; only what they placed beneath
all that, this was what caused the Church to wince in horror, saying: “But what have they done
with our God?” I can speak about the soul at great length, I can present one course after another
on the soul; everything depends on what I put into this. And I still must have a reason for calling
that “soul”.
You see what Spinoza’s reason was, to wit: if discernment is what responds in thought, in the
thought attribute; if that’s what responds in the thought attribute, to what is movement and rest in
the extension attribute, there is every reason to say: the particle, insofar as it has rest and
movement, refers to extension, but insofar as it discerns, it refers to thought. And the particle,
insofar as it refers to thought, is soul. This is a marvel; this is beautiful, so beautiful.
So, this, I am saying it only very quickly because we haven’t yet reached it, but what I want to
suggest to [Georges] Comtesse is that… My idea would be that it’s only to the extent that this
theme of discernment appears that we will be able to understand how perseverance is going to
become a tendency to persevere, for it’s in this way, in fact, that I can say: insofar as [the
particle] discerns the particle with which it can be composed, a particle tends to be joined
(s’unir). Here, the notion of tendency results directly from the particle’s power of discernment.
The particle tends, within extension, it tends toward something within extension, because it
discerns within thought. It’s power of discernment that is going to determine movement as a
tendency toward movement.
But in the end, here we are, here’s the point we’ve reached. So, there will be this discernment
that results in… There is more: this discernment is going to become extremely complicated. I
return to my examples. Up until now, when I was speaking of arsenic and blood, I was placing
myself on blood’s side, that is, on my side. I was saying: arsenic decomposes the constitutive
relation of blood. Let’s situate ourselves on the side of arsenic. I’m an arsenic particle. – You
have a domain here of great richness in imaginary experience – Constitute yourself there, within
your imagination, as a particle of this or that, and your point of view is going to change. All of
you here, we are all arsenic particles, except some of us. [Laughter] You see that there is only
one remaining here; we are all arsenic particles. We are managing… And we find ourselves
within another person’s blood, and there, insofar as being a particle, we find… What do we find?
We find other particles that obey a blood relation. So, we’re here, fine. And we have the power
to decompose, but this is not a global power of decomposing, one always has to decompose in a
very precise way when one destroys; when we decompose, it’s minute. We can imagine two
kinds of poisons, one that attacks white blood cells, the other that attacks red blood cells. That
must exist within nature, as nature is so rich…

                                                                                                   17

So, in any case, even within relations of decomposition, there is indeed a discernment. I suppose;
I don’t know anything at all about it. I am imagining, poison – I call it that; I don’t dare say
“arsenic” because this is a word that exists – Imagine an imaginary word: that poison destroying
red blood cells obviously must recognize them. It has to recognize them in the blood. In a certain
way, it’s in a counter-affinity with them. Very good. The power of discernment extends as far as
particles’ movements and rest extend. It seems that we’ve gained a lot. Here’s what I can say: the
actions and reactions of bodies are inseparable from the discernment of souls. And there is no
movement and rest within the body without there also being discernment in souls, discernment
for good and for ill, for the best and for the worst, for the best in the case of compositions of
relations, for the worst in the case of destruction of relations. Particles recognize each other; this
is how they are animated, as Spinoza says. Particles recognize each other through the relations,
and under these relations, they are realized. There we are…
Hence, I can move on to a fourth point. Once again, this appears to me very close to today’s
information theory. Simply put, information theory returns, it seems to me, to notions of this
kind while giving them an entirely new content thanks, precisely, to techniques of information.
And the difference is enormous.
I am passing on to a fourth point of view, unless you’d like a break? [Beside Deleuze, someone
(perhaps Claire Parnet) says: No, no…] A short break? [No, no] No break? [No, no] … No
break… Of course, [Laughter] there are some here that need a break. [Pause] So, a short break,
ok? A very short break… [Pause]
All this, [Pause, as people get settled] all this should give us some starting points. I mean by this
that I don’t want to approach the entirety of the question here, at the moment, but it ought to give
us some principles for problems like those of what illness is, or what death is, for Spinoza, you
see, because finally this whole story of modes… We are all modes, that is, we are not beings; we
are manners of being. This is what you must not lose sight of.
But, generally, other philosophers… Other philosophers were always quite tormented by
Spinoza. In all the history of philosophy, Spinoza is the one, I believe, who sometimes created
the most enthusiasm, who created a kind of enthusiasm that, nonetheless, the others didn’t
produce, and sometimes created the most irritation. And he is irritating because… he irritates,
yes… And the people that he irritated greatly, the Cartesians, the Thomists, finally, everyone…
At the start, he irritates all of those for whom beings are substances; all of those for whom “beings” are necessarily substances, these [philosophers] are eminently irritated by Spinoza. And
they are going to challenge him with a kind of diabolical bet. They tell him: “Listen, Spinoza, it’s
one thing or the other: if you say that beings aren’t substances, although you will try to hide it,
you are necessarily even saying with this that beings, you and me, are nothing but dreams, God’s
dreams, that we are imaginary creatures, that we are phantasms. Or else, at the extreme, if you
offer us a being, since in any case this isn’t a being of substance, you will only have the choice
between this and that: either you will makes us into kinds of geometrical beings, or else into
phantasms from the imagination.”

                                                                                                   18

And it’s very odd that Leibniz, for example, in his critique of Spinoza, of Spinozism, Leibniz
being obsessed by Spinoza as were many thinkers at this period, he never stops saying,
sometimes: “You see what Spinoza makes of creatures. He assimilates creatures; he gives them
exactly the status of geometrical figures.” The geometrical figure, in any case, brings the two
together, because if I consider the geometrical figure traced in sand, it’s like a phantasm of the
imagination. If I consider it in itself, this is a series of necessary consequences that result from
axioms, from principles. So, Spinoza is told: by refusing the quality of substance for “be-ings”,
the status of substance, necessarily you no longer have any choice except between assimilating
them to simple geometrical figures or assimilating them to dreams from the imagination. So,
from both approaches, you refuse them all their own consistency. Henceforth, we will only either
be dreams of the unique substance, or necessary properties resulting from the unique substance.
And Spinoza remains quite calm. He judges that he has found an entirely different path. There is
a consistency of modes, and nonetheless, modes are not substances. And this consistency is not
substantial; it’s a consistency of relations. So, at the point we’ve reached, you understand, all that
was a bit theoretical, [so] what changes practically? Obviously, this is why I am coming to this
fourth point, that specifically, what changes practically, well, it’s not in the same way. If you
present yourself as a manner of being – and this is not a question for reflection --, one has to
have a taste for that; it’s a matter of sensibility.
There are substantial sensibilities, at that time, those having a substantial sensibility… I dream
really of creating a thing on philosophical sensibility. Sensibilities, that’s how you’ll discover
authors that you’ll like. Now, I am not trying to tell you, “Be Spinozists”, because I could care
less. What I do care about is that you discover what you need, that each of you might find
authors that you need, that is, authors that have something to say to you, and to whom you have
something to say. And I am saying that with this choice, what torments me in philosophy, is this:
in the same way that we speak about artistic sensibility, for example, a musical sensibility, etc.,
and indeed, musical sensibility is undifferentiated. It doesn’t only consist in saying, “I love
music”; it also means: I’m concerned, strangely, with things that I myself don’t understand; I am
particularly concerned with a particular [musician], a particular one. Ah, for me, it’s… I suppose,
for me, it’s Mozart… Mozart says something to me. It’s odd, this… Because for everyone, that’s
not it. There are others who will say “no”.
In philosophy, it’s the same thing, there’s a philosophical sensibility, hence someone … It’s a
matter of molecules here as well. In this, if we apply everything we just said earlier, fine, well, it
happens that someone’s molecules will be attracted, will already in some way be Cartesian…
There are Cartesians… Good, I understand, a Cartesian is someone who has indeed read
Descartes well and who wrote books on Descartes, but that isn’t very interesting. There are
Cartesians, nonetheless, at a better level. They consider that Descartes whispers something in the
ear to them, something fundamental for life, including the most modern life. Good, I… I take up
my example: really, Descartes says nothing to me, nothing, nothing, nothing… He drops from
my hands; he pisses me off (me fait chier). [Laughter] And nonetheless, I’m not going to say that
he’s a poor slob; obviously, he’s got genius, Descartes. Good, fine, he’s got genius; for myself,

                                                                                                    19

that’s not my concern. He never spoke to me at all. Fine. There we are, so how do we explain
these matters of sensibility? Good… Hegel… Hegel? What is that? Good.
What does that mean, these molecular relations? I am making a case here for molecular relations
with the authors that you are reading. Find what you like. Never spend a second criticizing
something or someone. Never criticize, never, never, never. And if someone criticizes you, you
say, “fine, move along”, [Laughter] eh? Nothing to be done. Find your molecules. If you don’t
find your molecules, you cannot even read. That’s what reading is: it’s finding your very own
molecules. They are in books, your cerebral molecules. They are in books, and these books, you
have to find them. I find that nothing is sadder for gifted young people, in principle, than
growing old without ever having found the books that they really liked, or never finding any, in
the end, and then all at once, playing the scholar about all books. That’s a funny thing; it makes
you bitter, you know, this kind of intellectual bitterness that takes things out against others for
your not having been able to find what you loved. So… The air of superiority that one acquires
by dint of being stupid…. All that is unfortunate. But you’ve got to have a relation, at the
extreme, only with what you love. [Laughter] Good, so…
And so, what relation is there between sensibility in itself and philosophical sensibility? What
relation is there as well between sensibility in itself and musical sensibility? When I say, for
example, “Ah for me, in music, above all I place…”, stupid kinds of expression, idiotic kinds of
expression, but that are easy, expressing what people say… When someone tells me, for
example, “Above everyone, I place Mozart…” What is it in his sensibility that vibrates to
Mozarat? What makes me say… and then, this gets extremely differentiated, a particular moment
in Mozart, above all, above all the other moments in Mozart… “Ah, the little kettle drums there,
ah, the little kettle drums… Now that’s music!” It’s really odd…
Philosophy is the same. Being Spinozist means… -- That doesn’t at all mean having Spinoza’s
doctrine – That means having had this feeling, having vibrated to certain texts by Spinoza,
saying: Ah yes, nothing more can be said. So, in this, philosophy is part of literature and art in
general; it yields exactly the same emotions. So, I am saying, you understand in this story of
sensibility, it’s obvious that here, it’s not… Forget the complicated words, but if you live like a
substance, like being, it’s a certain manner of living. You say, myself, I feel like a being. There’s
nothing wrong with that. I’ll tell you simply: Good, fine, drop Spinoza; don’t read Spinoza… Or
stop coming to this course, it’s not worth the trouble since… This might be of interest to you
then, but in very, very exterior way. Your real interest… You’re wasting your time, so your real
interest would be to go listen to things about people or listen to people who truly think that they
are beings. Once again, that means something; it’s an entire sensibility, and even quite varied,
since that could perhaps be an Aristotelian sensibility, perhaps a Cartesian sensibility, perhaps a
Christian sensibility, all sorts of very different sensibilities that result in experiencing oneself a
bit like beings.
So, doing philosophy will mean doing philosophy following your taste. If you experience
yourself as a being, henceforth this comes down to saying: “What does being mean?”, in the
sense of “I am a being.” You must get informed about all this. You must read people who have

                                                                                                  20

said this. If you have the slightest emotion when faced with Spinoza, I have a feeling that it’s as
a function of this: that in your sensibility, there is something in you that makes you tell yourself,
even if you aren’t thinking about this: “No, I don’t experience myself as a being.” So, fine… Do
I experience myself as a dream? That could happen, but at that point, I’d say: Spinoza is not what
you need. If you experience yourself as a dream, there are certainly some great authors that have
lived a bit like a dream. You have to find them. I assume there are some great… some great…
some great Germans who have truly lived like a dream, some great German Romantics, yes
indeed. Go look at them; they’re what you need…
You understand, I don’t believe… I think about an author that I suppose many among you deeply
like. But why, why does Beckett really represent an entire sensibility in our era? He invented this
sensibility; he gave it its literary expression. One cannot say that Beckett’s characters experience
themselves as beings. How do they experience themselves? They don’t experience themselves
like Spinoza either. It’s difficult to say that they’re Spinozists. There are so many manners of
living unless they experience themselves a bit like a Spinozist, to some extent, I don’t know.
They don’t experience themselves as dreams either.
In any case, I would define the Spinozist sensibility as a sensibility such that I experience myself
as a manner of being. I experience myself as a mode, that is, as a manner of being. It’s very
different between being a being or a manner of being. So, at that point, I can sense that Spinoza
has something to tell me, if that interests me, concerning the question: But what does “a manner
of being” mean? And what is this, living in a way that’s a manner of being? Living as a manner
of being? And what is life and death for a manner of being? And what is illness and health for a
manner of being? Etc. This must not be the same thing as for a being. It’s in this way that all this
has practical consequences. So…
Hence my question, and there… Oh… [Pause] All this snapping [of tape recorders, cassettes
being changed]. [Laughter] Doesn’t yours work? It’s broken? [Laughter] [Pause]
I’m trying to create a kind of typology of cases. What might happen that’s bad? You recall, in
my first point, I had in fact said: What is it that happens that’s bad, from my point of view? What
happens to me that’s bad, in general, is when one of my relations is destroyed. That’s something
bad because, in fact, that suppresses my perseverance. [Pause]
[The tape recorder snapping continues] But this is hallucinating… [Pause] I have the impression
of being in a Target (Prisunic). [Laughter] This is straight out of Jerry Lewis… [Laughter]
Parnet: You really think so? [Pause]
Deleuze: So, yes… I am creating a kind of study of cases with this general formula: what’s bad
is when one of my relations is destroyed. And here we have the simplest case, to which I won’t
return because… we already know it well now. Adam and the apple, or arsenic and blood. Quite
simple: an exterior body, under its own relation, destroys one of my relations. You see, the
expression is quite simple; it’s quite precise. So, all or part of my relations are destroyed. There
we have a first case of something bad. And my question starts from there: isn’t this the simplest
case? Isn’t there grounds for considering other cases, nonetheless, and more complicated ones?

                                                                                                      21

I’d say, a second case… Imagine this: my relations, in general, are… -- this is very delicate, all
that; this is meant to have you sense that, in fact, the second case already bites into the first – in
general, my relations are conserved. All or part, the most of, most of my relations are conserved.
But here we are: they’ve lost their mobility or their communication. This is another case… This
can happen… I am telling myself, concretely, this happens: all my relations are conserved
generally and from the outside. But they’ve lost this kind of property that belongs to them insofar
as they are relations of movement and rest, notably their property of communicating with one
another. We’ve seen this, and it’s why I was insisting so much, in my [point] “two” today, in my
second section, on this communication… No, in my [point] “one”, in my starting point today… I
was saying, necessarily, relations that compose me are perpetually in communication with each
other, since my complex relations never stop being decomposed into the simplest, and the
simplest never stop recomposing the most complex. It’s even in this way that I have a duration.
And here, imagine, most of my relations are conserved. But everything occurs as if they were
solidified; they no longer communicate very well, or certain ones no longer communicate with
others.
In what way is this interesting? Because that interests me, I don’t know why, but… I tell myself:
the first case, the apple and arsenic, there, the poison… It was quite simple. I return to my theme,
my problem, which was to derive a theory of illness from Spinoza. I’d say, this is a very simple
case: it’s illness by intoxication. It’s illness of intoxication. [Pause] I’d say, these are illnesses of
action. These are illnesses of action. In this sense, a toxic body, since its relation does not
compose itself with mine, acts upon mine, thus destroys my relation. A foreign body acting on
me in bad conditions equates to illness of action, or illness of intoxication. You see, all viral
illnesses, bacterial illnesses, etc., are of this type. [Pause]
My second case, it seems to me, is already entirely different. There can be an intervention of
bacteria and viruses, but this is no longer the essential. There can be an exterior agent, but this
time, this exterior agent is defined less by the fact that it would destroy my relation – it destroys
certain ones if necessary, you see that there are fringes between the two cases. -- But it’s less this
that counts, it’s less the relations that it destroys, than the interior communication of my relations
that is compromised. If necessary, each relation continues to function, but the phenomena of cofunctioning, of metabolism, of transformation of relations with one another no longer occur. I’d
say that for you here, it’s an entirely different domain, illnesses of metabolism, or of
communication, that affect the communication of relations between them. And at the extreme,
understand, I can have -- At the extreme! All these are cases; I’m trying to indicate diverse cases
– At the extreme, I am able to have conserved all my relations, but in fact, I am already dead. It’s
a kind of premature death. Here I am still breathing, fine… My blood circulates, fine… But there
is no longer any communication between the circulation of blood and the respiratory circuit; it no
longer works, or at least, communication works poorly. The oxygenation of the blood no longer
occurs.
Fine, so let’s group this… There’s a word, in fact, I see… the word among words in modern
science, in biology, it’s… Which would refer back to this domain of communication of relations
that is decomposed and recomposed at the core of my persistence; it’s what would be called,

                                                                                                    22

today, the interior milieu and metabolism. So, I’ll say, this second case of illness are illnesses of
interior milieu and metabolism, very different from the others. And this is very interesting
because, at the extreme, I was saying… hence, my call for you to read two texts from book IV
[of the Ethics] that I indicated to you, this so very beautiful text by Spinoza that consists in
telling us: “But you know, we can even, at least apparently, stay the same, and in fact, we are
already dead.” And this question that seemed to be raised by this text, about what is called
artificial life support – you maintain a respiratory circuit, but the blood circulation is screwed.
The electroencephalogram shows that there’s no longer any cerebral communication. You
maintain a poor guy; you maintain a cadaver in a living state -- The recent case of Tito, the
recent case of Franco, etc. – You maintain kinds of articulated systems that have absolutely
nothing living any more, but you maintain them, like that, simply… You maintain each circuit,
but there is no longer any metabolism, that is, there is no longer any communication of circuits
between them. There you have a second case of illness, it seems to me, entirely… [Deleuze does
not complete this]
Third case: the essential aspect of my relations subsists – You see, we are moving into more and
more complicated cases – The essential aspect of my relations subsists, at least in appearance,
from the point of view of movement and rest. And my second case was: the relations subsist
generally, generally, but they’ve lost their suppleness, that is, their metabolism or power of
communicating, their communications within the interior milieu. Here, I imagine another case:
the essential aspect of my relations subsists, apparently, but what is lost is the power of
discernment over exterior bodies. [Pause] That is, … What does this case mean? I am breathing,
yes, but I have greater and greater difficulty decomposing air, that is, capturing the oxygen
necessary. Another case, you see, my respiratory relation subsists, but it subsists in conditions
such that it lacks discernment, and I have greater and greater difficulty uniting myself, literally,
uniting myself with the oxygen molecules that I need. In other words what is compromised here
are the reactions that result from relations. In fact, relations can orient reactions only through the
intermediary of molecular discernment.
I ask myself the question: couldn’t we say that here, there’s a third group of illnesses, illnesses of
intolerance? This would even be an interesting schema of illnesses of intolerance, because what
happens when someone has an intolerance, an allergy, for example, to dust, to dust? Or else,
what happens in asthmatic breathing? All these are very difficult subjects. Couldn’t we say this:
my pulmonary relation indeed subsists, but what isn’t functioning well is the power of
discernment, specifically the discernment of oxygen molecules, the molecular discernment. The
oxygen molecules, there’s something that snaps inside them. Perhaps I unite myself, even in the
air, perhaps my system is sufficiently misfunctioning for me to unite myself, in the air, with
molecules that are not precisely oxygen? But this would place us perhaps within another case…
In any case, here, this is the reaction; these are illnesses of reaction. This groups all the illnesses
that have gained greater and greater importance following discoveries connected to what’s been
called stress, which are not illnesses of action, or of the intoxication type, but are illnesses of
reaction, in which what constitutes the illness is the reaction. You see, this would make a third
group of illnesses.

                                                                                                    23

And so, I’ve kept for the end, obviously, the most beautiful, the most troubling one. Let’s go
farther still. This time, what’s broken is that my very interior, notably… It’s a new step. Already
at level three, there was an affection of power of discernment, of power of molecular
discernment. Here, at the level of this final case, of my fourth case, this is the power of internal
discernment that is going to be broken. Not the power of external discernment, but the power of
internal discernment. What do I call internal discernment? It means molecules of my body
recognize, distinguish molecules… No, excuse me, it means that molecules of my body, under a
given relation, distinguish other molecules of my body under a given relation and distinguish
them as belonging to a one and same body. This is what we’ve seen; this is constitutive of
persistence. For example, my pulmonary molecules recognize, in a certain way, discern my
blood molecules.
So, this time, you see the third case put into play, put into question the power of exterior
discernment; here, I am speaking of power of interior discernment, notably: in my organism,
under all the relations that compose it, the particles that realize these relations recognize one
another. This is the domain of perception, assuming this time that it’s this regime. There you
have certain molecules, under a given relation, going to engage with other molecules of mine
under a relation as foreign ones, as foreign ones from which they are going to decompose the
relation. [Pause]
And this is why I invited you to read this second text from book IV about an astonishing thing,
something that appears to me very, very strange, in which Spinoza says: but this is what suicide
is, that is, he proposes a typically noxious (maladif) model of suicide. Here, I believe that he sees
something so profound that this touches on points… [Deleuze does not finish] You understand
what he is telling us about suicide; he says it’s very simple – and here, I didn’t need to force the
texts; if you read this during vacation, as it was your task, these two texts at least – these two
texts on suicide are quite astonishing since this consists in telling us: well, yes, certain parts of
ourselves, under a relation, behave as if they had become the enemy of other parts of ourselves,
under other relations. As a result, we witness this astonishing thing: a body for which an entire
part is going to tend toward suppressing the others, as if it took literally, if you will, the suicide
gesture of, for example, I’m turning my own hand against myself by shooting myself with a
revolver or something like that. It’s like a rebellion of the parts, of certain parts, that’s going to
lead to a destruction of all the parts. Never have I seen anyone think of suicide in as intense and
as molecular a manner.
For, in the end, when we read a text today, I was telling you the last time, we have an entirely
different idea. But if Spinoza found only suicide to invoke, it’s because the biology of his era
didn’t give him the means. But today, when medicine speaks to us and discovers this fourth type
of illnesses, which is neither of intoxication, nor of metabolism, nor of intolerance, but is called
auto-immune illnesses, and which seem precisely to promise a brilliant future, that is, a very
great intuition and of discovering all sorts of other maladies that we didn’t know very well how
to treat, [these] belong precisely to this new category. What are auto-immune illnesses? Well, I
was telling you, if we have an immune system, the immune system is defined today as follows:
it’s precisely molecules, genetic molecules, that have the power to discern other molecules as

                                                                                                       24

belonging to my body. This is what biologists currently call precisely something like selfmolecules (molécules du soi), when [the biologists] begin using almost metaphysical concepts.
These are self-molecules since they have for biological function to recognize my component
molecules. This is the immune system. So, they are going to sort out component molecules and
foreign molecules. They are notably going to bring about phenomena of rejection in grafts: Ah,
this, it’s not mine, it’s not mine, so throw it out!
And I was telling you, suppose that the immune system, in one way or another, is attacked
(atteint). What happens? There are only two cases possible. What is going to be attacked is the
power to repulse foreign molecules. This is one possible case. Or else, what is going to be
attacked, and this is going to be even more odd, is going to be the power to recognize its own
molecules. There you have my body that no longer recognizes, in certain zones, in certain parts,
its own molecules. So, it treats them as intruders, as intruding foreign molecules.
What kind of illness is this? The auto-immune illnesses are illnesses of perception. Biologists
currently will say that these are illnesses of information. This constitutes an enormous group of
illnesses, enormous right now. One type of relatively known auto-immune illness is multiple
sclerosis, which is an extremely serious illness. And it’s a very new conception of the illness, and
why? Because, at the extreme, this is what? [Georges] Canguilhem devoted a text to this, to these
illnesses, but he hasn’t yet… It’s a text that precedes recent developments on auto-immune
illnesses. And he says, what does this come down to? There are a dozen very beautiful pages by
Canguilhem where he says, well yes, what does this come down to? This comes down to treating
the illness in an entirely new manner, he pretends, notably, the illness as error, illness as genetic
error. This is a certain model of illness that is valid for certain illnesses. Illness as genetic error is
nonetheless a very interesting concept, which in fact groups together all the current data of
biology and information science. The connecting point of biology and information science today
is this group of illnesses that can be considered as genetic errors, that is, errors in relation to the
genetic code. Either – so here, they are infinite – Either the genetic code itself creates an error, or
its transmission creates levels of error. You see that this is already a very, very varied domain.
In any case, illness as error, what does the error consist of? Here, I don’t need to force this to
say: well yes, for Spinoza, there is indeed an entire type of illnesses that are errors. What does
the error consist of? What is affected? It’s the system of molecular perceptive discernment. And
the illness consists of this: a difficulty of perception, notably, here you have my molecules of
discernment beginning to create and multiply errors.
And today, how do we interpret old age? A word for the concept of old age has been formed,
given its great biological importance, which is senescence. How is it interpreted? Among the
interpretations of senescence, of old age, of the aging process, today one of the most interesting
ones is this: it’s a hypothesis, like this, but it appears to me one of the most beautiful ones among
the specialists of senescence, of the aging process. They say: errors, in the sense of genetic
errors, errors of transmission in the information of the genetic code, the cells are constantly
created, but these errors simply are compensated. So here, errors and the little disturbances
owing to errors of reading of the genetic code are constant. But they say, a cell, well, it has an

                                                                                                        25

average of errors, there’s an average of possible errors. And then, there’s a moment in which a
threshold is reached. And it’s when the threshold of possible errors is reached that, at that
moment, there really is something irreducible, notably a phenomenon of senescence, of aging of
the cell, as if it collapsed under the number of its errors. Pathological error is a beautiful concept.
So, you understand, we mustn’t exaggerate, eh? When Spinoza said: “But evil is error,” he
cannot completely mean that. But when it’s a philosopher who really created an entire explicit
theory of perception, of the minute perception, of the power of discernment of particles, the
particles create errors, they no longer recognize each other. And old age would be this crossing
over the threshold of a cell’s tolerance, of a particle’s tolerance, in relation to these errors. So,
there we have a fourth type of illnesses, illnesses of error or of perception.
And so, what appear to me very odd, in the text to which I referred you, is the way in which
Spinoza brings suicide back to an illness of error, specifically: the entire zone of particles, under
given relations no longer recognizes the other particles under their relations as being my own, or
being their own, and turns against them. As a result, one would have to say about auto-immune
illnesses, literally, that they are organic suicides, [Pause] just like suicides are kinds of psychic
auto-immune illnesses. Yes, fine… There you have what I wanted to say about this possible
schema that gives us the concept of illness, the status precisely of modes and manners of being.
And so this works out well because – I’m going to stop soon – this works out well because we
now nonetheless dispose of a better – how to say this? – a better interpretation grid in order to
return entirely to the correspondence between Blyenbergh and Spinoza.5 For now that we have
access to this aggregate, I remind you of Blyenbergh’s immediate reaction, and the whole
correspondence, I hope, is going to take on a different meaning for us more concretely. For
Blyenbergh, from the point of view of sensibility, this is precisely – I believe that this is someone
who profoundly experiences himself – no one is going to make him budge from this --
Blyenbergh does experience himself as a being. And this is why that all of Spinozism at once
attracts him as something very, very strange and repulses him quite deeply. And he interrogated
Spinoza in a demanding way, on the mode of: Well, come on, what does all that mean? Oh right,
you aren’t a being? And the entire topic of good and evil, it’s here, with his attitude, and on the
level of the grid that I proposed to you today that we must resituate this topic.
And on this level, here we have, it seems to me, Blyenbergh making two very strong objections.
The two strong objections – you’re going to sense that they are completely linked with
everything that we discussed today – I’d say, the first one concerns nature in general. It consists
of saying: your modal point of view, from the point of view of such a conception of modes, you
won’t be able to work your way out of this: nature can only be chaos. You remember that
Spinoza just defined nature in general as an aggregate of all the relations that are composed and
decomposed, not only from my own point of view, but from all points of view.
Blyenbergh’s retort, which seems quite interesting: what are you talking about there? This
nature, then, is pure chaos! Why is it pure chaos? Because you’ll notice that each time a body
acts on another, there is always composition and decomposition at the same time. It’s not on this
level that I could say there is good and bad. Why? Because there necessarily is composition and

                                                                                                    26

decomposition, both within each other. If arsenic acts on my body, it’s a case of what’s bad; it
decomposes several of my relations, but why? Because it determines my particles to enter under
another relation. With this other relation, arsenic’s relation is composed, so there is not only
decomposition, there’s composition as well, in the case of poisoning. My organism dies, but
precisely… [Interruption of the recording] [2:04:12]
Part 3
… For example, I am eating, and I say it’s good. What am I in the process of eating when I’m
eating beef or wheat? I decompose the relation of the particles under which they belong to wheat,
and as I say, I incorporate them, that is, I submit them to my own relation. Here as well, there is
decomposition and composition. But I never cease decomposing and recomposing; moreover, I
can hardly imagine that I could have a composition that wouldn’t lead to or have decompositions
as its reverse or flip side.
So, nature is the aggregate of decompositions as much as of recompositions. And I could never
distinguish pure compositions and decompositions. They exist entirely within each other. So,
nature is pure chaos. And in fact, when Spinoza had said, “be careful, there is neither good nor
evil,” there’s good and bad; but there’s good and bad – he had specified this – there’s good and
bad, from my point of view, that is, from the point of view of a determined body. But, from the
point of view of nature in general, there’s neither good nor evil, but there is neither good nor bad
either. Any composition implies decompositions; any decomposition implies compositions. This
is chaos! And [Blyenbergh’s] objection is very, very strong. How would nature not be chaos?
And there’s Blyenbergh’s second objection. Blyenbergh says: “This time, fine, I place myself in
the point of view of the point of view,” that is, of the point of view of a precise body, for
example, mine, [where] there’s good and bad. What’s bad is that which decomposes my
relations; what’s good is that which is composed with my relations.
So, fine, there’s good and bad, from the point of view of a body. He will distinguish arsenic and
nourishment. Arsenic, bad; nourishment, good. But, a new objection from Blyenbergh, you’ll see
that it’s very different: that gives no objective content to the notions of vice and virtue. That
gives no objective content to the notions of vice and virtue since if you distinguish arsenic and
nourishment, this is because one agrees with you and the other doesn’t agree with you. And are
you going to say that vice is what doesn’t agree with you, and that virtue is what agrees with
you? In fact, morality has always told us the opposite, to wit: for virtue, a difficult effort was
necessary to attain it, that is, it didn’t particularly agree with you, and on the contrary, vice could
very well agree with me, but that didn’t make it any less vice. In other words, morality begins
from the moment that one doesn’t assimilate vice and virtue into simple tastes.
Hence, Blyenbergh’s objection: you only have a criterion of taste to distinguish actions, and you,
Spinoza, if you abstain from committing crime, if you abstain from committing crimes, it’s
solely because they would have a bad taste for you. And in fact, Spinoza himself had said in an
earlier letter: “I abstain from committing crimes because these horrify my nature.” But this is
completely immoral! Abstaining from committing crimes because this horrifies your nature is

                                                                                                    27

not what morality asks of you. Morality begins from the moment in which it tells you to abstain
from committing crimes even if you want to. Because, what assures me that Spinoza’s nature is
going to continue to be horrified by committing crimes? Hence, Spinoza’s even stranger
statement, what does it mean when, at the end of his correspondence, he says: “If someone saw
that committing crimes agreed with his essence, or killing himself did, that person would indeed
be wrong not to kill himself or not to commit crime”?
So, both of Blyenbergh’s objections, you see that they are very different and that they are quite
strong. And, to understand how Spinoza is going to be able to attempt a response to these
objections, I believe that we simply must make a final – after this, I’m done – a final
reorganization. This final reorganization is a concrete reorganization because we may get lost in
all this; it’s very subtle. It’s easy to understand, but it’s very subtle.
So, let’s return to some examples of evil, and in what way does this indeed concern the same
domain about which Spinoza is speaking to us, concretely? I am choosing three incontestable
examples of evil: theft, there we have evil; crime is evil; and an example that runs through all the
manuals of morality and theology during that era, adultery. What interests me… I am choosing
these three examples because Spinoza chooses them in his correspondence with Blyenbergh, and
these are very concrete examples. And all that I am asking in finishing up for today is this: in
what way do these – theft, crime, adultery -- concern everything that we’ve discussed today?
Listen to what Spinoza tells him: So, what is not good in these? Fine, I am speaking like
everyone: this is evil. What is evil in crime? Well, what’s evil, says Spinoza, is quite simple;
here, there aren’t many problems. By my act, I decompose the constitutive relations of another
body. That is: I kill someone; so, I decompose the constitutive relations of another body. You
see, this is interesting for crime because this appears more difficult for theft and adultery. And in
fact, it’s obvious that Spinoza has something in mind and that he didn’t choose these examples at
random. But whatever the example might be, this works.
Theft; imagine theft. What is evil in theft? We are told that it’s evil, but we cannot believe it if
we don’t see what is evil in theft, so we have to see what this evil is. So, nobody else will steal
anymore if he sees clearly what the evil is in theft; this is because people don’t see what’s evil in
theft. And, you recall Spinoza’s expression. Generally, evil, or what’s bad in any case, consists
in one thing: it’s always that a relation is destroyed. A relation is decomposed, a relation is
destroyed. And so, in theft, there is indeed a relation that is destroyed. It’s this: how is property
defined? We have to do some law. Because property is very interesting for all our problems.
Because in all this, these are very concrete problems; substances, modes, etc., these stories are
very concrete. Are we substances? Are we modes? Is property a quality? Well, what is property?
I am saying this as obscurely as possible. Is it of the kind “the sky is blue”, of the kind “Pierre is
smaller than Paul”? Is property an attributable quality, or else is it a relation? And a relation
between what and what?
I’m going to tell you; I believe that property is a relation. But I very well imagine some theories
of property that would show, or would try to show, that property is a quality attributable to
someone. But I don’t believe this; I believe that it’s a relation. It’s a relation between two terms,

                                                                                                    28

one term that we’ll call property, another term that we’ll call the property owner. What is this
relation? What does this relation of property consist of, if it’s a relation? Property’s relation is
very interesting; it would require me a long while to try to define this type of relation that is
called property. Once again, this isn’t certain. There are people who will be able to consider
property as an attribute, but I’m not certain about this, but in any case, they’re wrong. I wonder if
St. Thomas, if theologians don’t consider property as an attribute, but here, then, I haven’t
reflected on this, so I’d have to go consult the texts to see.
Fine, but in the end, it doesn’t matter; we ourselves don’t consider property as an attribute. We
consider it as a relation, I mean you and me. And here we are, this relation, fine… For example,
here’s a text, a text by another philosopher, and he says: there is a right of property. We’d have
to study all the property rights in order to see what types of relations are in play in property.
Here's a case, a case that I cited to you because it is so moving, a classic case, that constituted
jurisprudence from Antiquity. You have… There’s an abandoned city. A city is abandoned, and
there are two guys that are running toward the city. They’re running very, very fast. And one of
them touches the door with his fingers, fine. And the other, behind him, shoots an arrow into the
door… Not into the first guy, into the door. [Laughter]
A juridical problem: who is the owner? What is the property right here? This is property of nonoccupied things, the right of occupation. Over non-occupied things, you have a right of property
through occupation. What’s going to define occupation? First case, jurisprudence said: you have
to touch the thing. We have created our entire empire by planting our flag into lands which, no
doubt, were occupied before, but we’ve forgotten that, [Laughter] and it wasn’t occupied by
other Europeans. We planted our flag; it was an act of property by right of the first occupant, as
it was said. Obviously, that caused problems, but… Fine. Here we have the question: the hand on
the door of the city initiates a relation. Conventionally, henceforth this relation is – you see, I’m
introducing the idea that there are relations through convention, which will be very important for
what follows – there are natural relations and conventional relations. The law, the system of law
decides through convention that this relation – which is relation of contiguity, my hand touching
the door… Whereas in the other case, the guy who shoots the arrow, there is no relation of
contiguity. There’s a relation of causality. He fired the arrow, and the arrow is in contiguity with
the door when it was planted in it.
To do law and to enjoy doing law means enjoying problems of this kind. Who is the owner? Did
the relation arrow-shooter suffice to induce through convention a relation of property or not?
You see, being a judge means deciding cases of this kind. It’s not easy. Or else, did the sole
relation of the hand-door contact induce the conventional property relation? You see that in these
cases, a natural relation is selected, a natural relation is chosen, in order to signify a conventional
relation: property. So, this is a very beautiful problem, the problem of property from the point of
view of a theory of relations.
And, I am just saying, notice how the problem of property, the problem of theft, returns fully
within Spinoza’s schema: when I steal, I destroy the relation of convention between the thing and
its owner. And this is uniquely because I am destroying a relation that I am committing evil. This

                                                                                                   29

is a good idea from Spinoza: each time that you destroy a relation, you are doing evil. But you’ll
tell me, how does one avoid doing evil? When I eat, I am destroying a relation; I am destroying
the relations of the beef in order to incorporate the beef molecules within me. [Laughter] Fine,
fine, he’ll say, ok, ok… Let it go; let it go its own way, along its own path…
And so, adultery? Ah, ah… [Laughter] Everything is explained, it’s quite marvelous. And so,
this is evil because you decompose a relation. Oh yes? So, if I don’t decompose any relation, I
can commit adultery. Yes! Because his understanding is limited, Spinoza thinks that this is not
possible, that within adultery, in any case, a relation is decomposed. It’s not certain; there can be
some arrangements made with Spinozism, [Laughter] for what does he mean by decomposing a
relation? He means that marriage, and here, he even adds more to it, -- because on one hand, he’s
a bachelor [Laughter] and, on the other hand, he doesn’t really care about it that much – here, he
adds more to it in the sense that he takes things literally. He says: “You tell yourself that
marriage is the initiation of a sacred relation between the legitimate woman and the husband.”
This is a relation of convention, he will say: the relation of sacrament is by convention. He wrote
the Theologico-Political Treatise to relate all this quite well.
But the conventional relations are perfectly founded and, in the end, are founded in natural
relations. Fine, this is very important. So, in adultery, what you destroy is the conventional
relation that unites one of two partners, or both, to their respective spouse. You destroy a
relation. And once again Blyenbergh’s objections resound: whatever I do, I am destroying
relations, because after all, even love with my legitimate wife destroys relations. What relations?
For example, the relation that she had with her mother. Ah… By getting married, I am
nonetheless destroying the eminently natural relation that my legitimate wife had with her
mother. Am I destroying it, or am I composing it? So fine, we must have the legitimate wife’s
mother intervene in order to see if this is a composition of relations or if there’s a destruction of
relations. In each act of life, this isn’t complicated, we must take all of that into account. What do
I decompose as a relation, and what do I compose as a relation?
You understand what he’s getting at. There is going to be a funny thing within the Ethics, that
occurs constantly: “You don’t understand anything in life, and that’s what being a manner of
being is.” When needed, he doesn’t tell you anything more: each time that you do something,
look, be a little discerning, see what relations you are in the process of composing and what
relations you are in the process of decomposing. So, [there’s] a kind of prodigious calculus of
relations, a prodigious composition-decomposition of relations. And Blyenbergh arrives with his
objection: “But everything is simultaneously composition-decomposition, so in any case, you
will be within pure chaos because you yourself, to the extent that you consider yourself to be a
manner of being, you are only pure chaos, you’ve reduced yourself to the state of pure chaos”.
Do you understand?
And here we have Spinoza who’s going to answer; here, Spinoza has reached one of his limits.
He doesn’t like someone treating him like chaos. [Laughter] He reaches one of his limits; he’s
going to say: “No, above all not that.” You might be correct on all the other points, he tells
Blyenbergh – besides, he doesn’t care, but there is a point on which he cannot yield; it’s that the

                                                                                                                  30

Ethics is not a pure benediction of chaos; that, to the contrary, the Ethics gives us the means to
distinguish good and bad; he won’t yield on this – and there are two sorts of acts, that is, acts that
have as dominant trait to compose relations, and these are good acts, and acts that have as
dominant trait to decompose relations, and those ones are bad acts. But how?
A student: So, for example, if I steal a book at a supermarket, I am composing a relation, and the
theft in that case would be a positive act to the extent that I am composing a relation, then, with
the book, which is more interesting than the relation that the book had with the supermarket…
Deleuze: Spinoza would say “no”, because the book’s relation with the supermarket that is the
[book’s] legitimate owner has value not only through the nature of the supermarket and of the
supermarket’s director, but by the sacredness of conventional relations, of symbolic relations.
That is, when you committed this act, well, when someone commits this act, [Laughter] this
abominable act of stealing the book, [Laughter] the act is only abominable to the extent that it
consists of destroying the integrality of all symbolic relations. Because, afterward, if you’re told,
“well, ok, you stole a book, and so, eh? What’s next for you?” It’s all relations… Are there
conventional relations that you respect, or is it all conventional relations that you are going to
destroy? And there are certain book thieves who, by stealing a book, destroy the aggregate of all
conventional relations. There are even some who destroy the aggregate of conventional and
natural relations. It’s at them that this expression is aimed: whoever steals a book, steals an egg.
[Laughter] There we are.
So, this is the exact point that we’ve reached: how is Spinoza going to maintain his position,
“there’s indeed a distinction between good and bad”? There we are; try to live, until next week.
Notes

  This comment may have followed Deleuze opening request for any questions or problems that student may have
had.
  Deleuze refers implicitly here to the earlier sessions of the Spinoza seminar, notably to material developed on
November 25, December 2, and December 9, 1980 (and possibly earlier; no earlier lectures are available). This
reference also corresponds to his discussion in chapter 2 of Spinoza: Practical Philosophy, titled “On the Difference
between the Ethics and a Morality.”
  In contrast to the translation of Spinoza: Practical Philosophy by Robert Hurley, I have chosen to translate
“ensemble” with aggregate rather than set, unless the specific context calls for the latter term.
  Deleuze discusses this letter and consideration of the part of blood in Spinoza: Practical Philosophy, pp. 32-33
(Spinoza: Philosophie pratique, pp. 46-48).
  The shift of topics returns to the discussion in the previous session (16 December 1980) about the question of evil
in the correspondence with Blyenbergh. Chapter 3 of Spinoza: Practical Philosophy also addresses this
correspondence and these questions.