1

Gilles Deleuze
Seminar on Anti-Oedipus, 1972-1973
Lecture 03, 14 May 1973
Transcription: WebDeleuze and Le Terrier; modified transcription, Charles J. Stivale
Translated by Christian Kerslake

… one would be engaging in a flattening operation. We’re starting from a point where what
happens in a completely private way to an alcoholic or a drug user, or what happens to an
army in an operation of conquest, or what happens to a historically assignable State, to social
formations – we are going to consider all of that as if it were spread out on a plane of
equivalence. From one plane to another, relations and networks are then woven, so that we
better understand the difference between these planes. Thus, we can proceed by treating
everything on the same plane: a guy in the process of [missing phrase], a nomad setting out to
conquer something … No reason not to put that on the same screen, if there’s a point to it –
because it's certainly not the same thing – but in order to see what fabric can be woven
between all that.

Why is this linked to the problem of the production of statements?

Last time, I attempted to distinguish the kinds of strata which were produced on the body
without organs and which inhibited, and which were even made to inhibit, the functioning of
the body without organs.1 I would like to start again from there. Everything happens as if the
body without organs, once given, was prevented from functioning. All the same we have
some ideas on how it functions. The body without organs can be anything: it can be a living
body, it can be a place, it can be a land, anything you like. The body without organs
designates a use.

A body without organs being assumed, it always undergoes, that is why it is never given.
What I call body without organs is a kind of limit that, in a logic of desire, we must land on,
or one must approach to it. Yes, the best we can do is to approach it, because maybe if we did
more than approach it or reach for it, then the body without organs would reverse itself and
would brandish its death-face to us. It takes a lot of prudence to make oneself a body without
organs; it takes a lot of prudence not to get blown up, patience is needed. In any case, all the
more so, if it is a limit to approach prudently, that’s because in order to approach it, things
have to be blown up.

We know that it is precisely through lines of flight that we manage to approach the body
without organs. Flight from what? What are we running from? We’re starting to have ideas
about that; and on the other hand, not all lines of flight are equally valid. And yet, once again,
I will consider them at the beginning as equivalents: the drugged line of flight, the
revolutionary line of flight, which, however, are completely different from each other. For the
moment I’m not looking for how they are different, even if that ultimately becomes the
problem: how they can both plug into each other and how they can be completely different.
They do not put the same machines into play.

                                                                                                 2

What prevents the body without organs from functioning, and what makes it so that, for us,
the body without organs is always to be fabricated, is that it undergoes all sorts of inhibitions.
It is never given except through inhibitions that need to be blasted away. Everything happens
as if it were caught in a triple bandage, and I would like to try to clearly situate the notions
that correspond to this triple inhibitory bandage.

These bandages, we can just as well call them strata. As opposed to what? The stratum is
almost like a kind of formation on the body without organs that will cause it to fall back on
itself, to refold itself, to form one-to-one relationships. The body without organs taken in a
stratum is folded, refolded, forms a falling back that produces one-to-one relationships, and it
is these one-to-one relationships which prevent the functioning of the BwO (body without
organs), because the BwO, if it manages to function, functions in the form of a regime of
polyvocal connections. So that crimping it, imposing techniques which push it back down, so
that it no longer functions through polyvocal relations – that is already to take away all
chances from it. In other words, everything happens on the body without organs, both its
inhibitions and its formation, its constitution, its fabrication.

And so the three strata are rules through which the body without organs does not function,
does not succeed in freeing itself. I think that they are opposed – I’m attempting to throw out
a whole series of words here to see what sticks and what doesn’t – that they should be
opposed to the body without organs itself, which is not stratified. And it is not stratified
because it is the plane of consistency, or what comes down to the same thing, the field of
immanence of desire. That means desire in its positivity, desire as process, and desire as
process precisely can only be defined negatively on the basis of what betrays it.

And we saw on previous occasions that the three great betrayals, the three maledictions on
desire are: to relate desire to lack; to relate desire to pleasure, or to the orgasm – see
[Wilhelm] Reich, fatal error; or to relate desire to enjoyment [jouissance]. The three theses
are connected. To put lack into desire is to completely misrecognize the process. Once you
have put lack into desire, you will only be able to measure the apparent fulfilments of desire
with pleasure. Therefore, the reference to pleasure follows directly from desire-lack; and you
can only relate it to a transcendence which is that of impossible enjoyment referring to
castration and the split subject. That is to say that these three propositions form the same
soiling of desire, the same way of cursing desire.

On the other hand, desire and the body without organs at the limit are the same thing, for the
simple reason that the body without organs is the plane of consistency, the field of
immanence of desire taken as process. This plane of consistency is beaten back down,
prevented from functioning by the strata. Hence terminologically, I oppose – but once again
if you can find better words, I’m not attached to these –, I oppose plane of consistency and
the strata which precisely prevent desire from discovering its plane of consistency, and which
will proceed to orient desire around lack, pleasure, and enjoyment, that is to say, they will
form the repressive mystification of desire.

So, if I continue to spread everything out on the same plane, I say let’s look for examples
where desire does indeed appear as a process unfolding itself on the body without organs
taken as field of immanence or of consistency of desire. And here we could place the ancient
Chinese warrior; and again, it is we Westerners who interpret the sexual practices of the
ancient Chinese and Taoist Chinese, in any case, as a delay of enjoyment. You have to be a
filthy European to understand Taoist techniques like that. It is, on the contrary, the extraction

                                                                                                    3

of desire from its pseudo-finality of pleasure in order to discover the immanence proper to
desire in its belonging to a field of consistency. It is not at all to delay enjoyment.

But I could just as well point to, in our civilizations – look at those who have studied
masochism – certain maso techniques, for example. The Chinese Tao, the Western maso, that
too gets interpreted as bringing into operation phenomena of delay of enjoyment, whereas its
operation is to discover a process immanent to desire, such that desire no longer relates to
pleasure. The whole problem is precisely what, in Taoist China, appears as the absence of all
perversion, as a desiring activity without perversion, the field of perversions being
completely external to that. In our societies, at least in the case of the maso, the equivalent
can only appear as perversion. It is obvious that the general economy of desire is not the
same.

So there you have it, I start from this first great opposition: plane of consistency of desire of
the body without organs and the strata which bind the body without organs. These strata, last
time, I saw three of them.

The first stratum is that of organization. The stratum of organization is very simple: it
consists in making the body without organs into an organism. And I use the word ‘make’ as
in making a child2: one makes him an organism; one organizes him according to the principle
of the yield of useful energies, of energies of work. One imposes on what happens on the
BwO. What happens is very variable; the job is not over with the fabrication of a body
without organs. On the contrary, it is not a scene, nor a place; the BwO is like a mastery,
starting from which something will happen because something will be produced. The stratum
of organization is entirely made to take what is on the point of happening, to take what is
already happening on the body without organs, into a system which will direct all that in a
completely different direction. It will divert it.

And this system, which will precisely extract the useful energies – called useful as a function
of social production, to inhibit so-called useless energies – well, this system is the articulatory
relation or the double organic organization. And this double organic organization, which is
truly at the basis of the constitution of the organism … the best example is muscle tone. You
have to look at the theory of muscle tone found among biologists, and I’m thinking of an
interesting theory proposed by [indistinct name], which shows that muscle tone is a statistical
given.3 And it’s interesting, because the way in which the fabrication of the organism
proceeds, when one makes an organism out of the body without organs, comes down to
saying that all the molecular phenomena which happen on the body without organs will be
taken up into large ensembles known as statistical. And this is even the first level of the
double articulation; they will be caught up in crowd [foules] phenomena, and this is going to
be the first stage of the passage from the molecular dimension belonging to the body without
organs – and the BwO is nothing other than a giant molecule.

And these molecular phenomena will be organized into large organic molar ensembles of the
skeleton type, and there, contemporary biologists show very well the extent to which the
organism is a statistical given, that is to say implying a microbiology, namely implying the
reduction of molecular, microbiological phenomena, to large statistical ensembles, or else, as
for muscle tone – and this is related – the role of the nervous system in the molar constitution
of organisms endowed with such a system.

                                                                                                  4

But then this role of the nervous system also explains something else to us, namely that the
organism in its relations with the external world is endowed with this strange faculty of
representation, by which it annexes to itself a portion of the external world: the organism is
not constituted as a form – what defines the form being precisely the double articulation –
without apprehending external reality as a form which corresponds, not by resemblance, but
according to relationships that biologists have tried to determine, namely [indistinct words].
And there is a whole derivation between the organic form itself, which we can call Form I,
based on the double articulation, and the organization of the perceived world of
representation, where the external world is grasped through the relay of the nervous system
under the species of a form of another type, Form II: that’s [Raymond] Ruyer’s direction of
research on the passage from the organic Form I to the Form II of perception.4 So all that’s to
do with the first stratum.

And I say ‘first’ because one has to start somewhere; above all, one should not interpret it as
chronologically first. Already the formation of the organism is very much connected to social
pressures, and when I said it was in accordance with the principle of useful energy, that
indeed calls upon a whole world of social production. So, I retain, for this first stratum of
organization, a certain number of concepts which seem to me key: useful or useless energy,
the articulatory relation or double organic articulation, muscle tone and the nervous system,
and representation. We can call that the volume of organization.

And then the second stratum will be the stratum of signification. And the stratum of
signification, we could just as well say that it follows from the first, as that the first supposes
it. And this time, we will no longer speak of the volume of the organism, but for reasons that
we will see presently, we will speak of the angle of significance. It is this second stratum
which prevents the body without organs as much from functioning as from being attained.
And this time, its difference with the first is that the stratum of organization resulted in a
world of representation distinct from reality, so that the great break which corresponded to
the stratum of organization was – first rupture, the rupture of double articulation – and then it
was just as much the rupture representation-real – [but now] the stratum of signification
passes to the interior of representation and it also consists … this time, it’s a rupture that
happens on the inside of representation, between what we will call the Signifier and the
Signified. Therefore, this break is of a completely different type, and it consists in what? It
consists first of all in a phenomenon of double articulation. This phenomenon of double
articulation does not coincide with signifier-signified. Double articulation is constitutive of
the signifier. It includes a first level which is also a certain way of forcing the molecular
phenomena which occur on the BwO to enter into the large ensembles, large ensembles
corresponding to statistical laws.

Only, this time, these molecular phenomena, they are what? At the level of representation,
it’s what can be called, for convenience, figures of expression. And so at a first level of this
articulation which is made within the framework of representation, the figures of expression
are taken up into ensembles that constitute distinctive units. Distinctive units, among
linguists, in their theory of representation in its relationship to speech, among linguists, these
are called phonemes, or even more simply, one can call them letters, although this not the
same thing.

So, the first level of representation which takes molecular phenomena into statistical
ensembles is: the figures of expression are taken up into statistical units, units not yet
significant but distinctive, that is to say which enter into relations of distinction with each

                                                                                                  5

other and which are called phonemes. The double articulation comes about because what are
called phonemes (distinctive units) are in turn taken up into the statistical units of another
type, this time significant or signifying units that one calls morphemes. There, the double
articulation does not correspond to the duality signifier-signified; it is wholly at the basis of
the constitution of the signifier. It is the signifier as such which implies double articulation,
this time the double articulation of representation and no longer of the organism. There would
already be here a whole problem consisting in seeing what the relationship is between the
organic double articulation and the double articulation of representation.

Thus the figures of expression as molecular phenomena are organized into these two
successive types of statistical units which constitute the signifier, that is to say, they are
translated into phonemes and morphemes.

And that’s why what seems to me very important in a linguist like [Louis] Hjelmslev is the
way in which he goes beyond both the domain of morphemes and the domain of phonemes,
in order to tell us a little something about the figures of expression in the free state, taken
below what he himself calls the conditions of identity of phonemes. And he is perhaps the
only one to have attained a kind of molecular linguistics, a micro-linguistics, and it’s very
important and sad – but maybe that will improve – that Hjelmslev was as if crushed by the
other currents of linguistics.5

Once you have this constitutive double articulation of the signifier, from that moment there is
no longer much difficulty in generating the signified as the correlate of the signifier. So the
double articulation bears on the engendering of the signifier and not on signifier-signified
relations. The signified will be, roughly, the set of icons (notion of C.S. Peirce) which
correspond to the signifying elements such as they are formed by the double articulation, the
icons being images. And on the side of the signified-icons, just as earlier the signifier implied
a double articulation imposed on the figures of expression, on the side of the signified, the
icons here also suppose a kind of system in which are caught up, this time, not figures of
expression, but figures of content. The imprisonment of figures of content in icons, in the
signified, and the statistical treatment of figures of content so as to form icons, that is to say
the set of images that correspond to the signifying elements, and then the parallel operation at
the level of the figures of expression taken up into the double articulation phonemesmorphemes, all that combines very well.

Simply, to finish with this level, with this second stratum, if I establish the signifier-signified
line, therefore, with at one end the capture of figures of expression, at the other end the
capture of figures of content, with the two poles I mentioned last time … For example, to be a
bit less obscure here, it represents, if you like, at the level of the nursery school, the way in
which one teaches children to draw, or when one teaches them to write; or, at the other pole,
the nursery school lesson about things, in the forms of drawing or in the forms of graphism
that one imposes on them – the figures of expression that are taken up into an imposed form,
those which will function as the signifier; and the others as the signified, that is to say, the set
of lessons of things, this is the signified which refers to the set of graphisms; that’s how it
works in the classic nursery school.

Therefore, in my line, I can say that the set of figures of expression led back to the signifier,
caught in the net of the signifier, and which I represent by a sort of circle around the signifier
– the set of figures of expression is thus reduced to a slavery, caught up in these units which
impose upon them so that they no longer play freely, no longer enter into free connections.

                                                                                                    6

On the other side, I can make the circle of the signified where, this time, it will be the set of
figures of content taken up in the system of lessons about things, equally enslaved and
prevented from entering into free connections. We assume that these two circles have an
intersection, and this intersection which is the very articulation signifier-signified, the
articulation graphic form-lesson about things, it is this intersection of the two circles, the
circle of the signifier and the circle of the signified, which constitutes what I called for
convenience the dominant real.

While the first stratum led to a representation-real break, the second stratum opens onto
something quite different: a break interior to representation with a new phenomenon of
double articulation which culminates with a duality which is no longer that of representation
and the real but is what in the representation of the dominant real differs from what will have
to be called a masked real. The masked real is what continues to work under the net of the
signifier and under the net of the signified, namely the free connections between figures of
expression and figures of content, treated in molecular manner, that is to say insofar as they
are not taken up in systems of enslavement.

And then, the third and last stratum – they follow from one another, but it would not be
difficult to do the inverse procedure, of showing that III is already presupposed by II. And
here, at the meeting point of the intersection, I would say the third stratum can be defined,
namely the stratum of subjectivation, to which corresponds more precisely the point of
subjectivation.6

The point of subjectivation is very curious, it must be very important, but I don’t quite yet see
how. I would say that there is no dominant real without a point of subjectivation, and this
point is not at all the point where the subject emerges. It is the point from which the angle of
significance and the variable opening of this angle are organized. It is always starting from a
point of subjectivation that the cut [découpage] of the dominant real is made, and it is always
starting from the point of subjectivation that the machine of signification will come into play,
and all the more, the machine of organization.

There is always – and it is in this sense that this third stratum is presupposed by the other two
– there is no organization of an organism, there is no significance of significations, there is no
determination of a dominant real, without a point of subjectivation which corresponds to it.
It’s not at all that it’s the point of subjectivation which makes the dominant real. Strictly
speaking, it measures it, it fixes its variable limits. Why variable? Because each of us
evidently has several points of subjectivation; but the point of subjectivation is not what will
fabricate the dominant real. It is what will permeate it, allowing us to rediscover ourselves
there, to fix ourselves to such and such a place in the dominant real and to maintain
ourselves, and to organize almost all our understanding and our resignation to the dominant
real. Starting from the point of subjectivation, one has the impression that one understands
everything, and that what belongs to the dominant real is there for eternity.

If I take someone, their points of subjectivation are very numerous and, ultimately, I ask
myself – that would make things easier – if the point of subjectivation isn’t a new function.
And it is through this that the third stratum flows from the second, if it is not a new function
of the signified itself, that is to say, of icons. Last time, I said: we see how, once the dominant
real has been assigned for someone, the dominant real, for example, let’s suppose, of a
worker, this is where one can see the angle of significance of a resigned worker: it’s the
factory, the job, the family. And then he will say: it’s always been like that, there will always

                                                                                                    7

be bosses, machines everywhere; all that is organized in a dominant real. The masked real is
what is masked by the dominant real, namely the trafficking of the bosses, or the force or
non-force of revolutionary groups who propose to blow up the dominant real, etc.

But the guy who is caught up in the dominant real, in the first case, he submits to it. That
means that, in a certain way, he must fuse with the impression of understanding this dominant
real. Now, I say that this is indeed the role of the point of subjectivation, which is not at all in
him; the point of subjectivation is what will constitute him, as a subject fixed in such and
such a place, but it is not the point of his subjectivity. The point of subjectivation is the point
from which the angle of significance of the dominant real will narrow and will vary its
opening, for example when the guy passes from his work to his family. The point of
subjectivation assumes the “Get on, the boss said so”; the boss functions as an icon in a very
special sense, that is to say, a point of subjectivation starting from which the description or
assignation of a dominant real is made.

And then, he gets home from work, he finds his wife, and I guess it’s not marvellous, he
gives her his wages. His wife acts as another point of subjectivation. If he is a fetishist, his
wife, as a global person, acts as a point of subjectivation sketching another dominant real in
the dominant real. It’s not the same angle, but it overlaps. And then comes the moment of
love, and he is a fetishist, so he loves his wife’s dress even more than his wife … a woman’s
dress, or a woman’s shoe also forms a point of subjectivation. We pass our time jumping
from one point of subjectivation to other points of subjectivation. But there is always a
masked real.

Typical case of a point of subjectivation: the chief.7 The chief has said this: long live Hitler.
There is the dominant real of Nazism and then the great icon, the figure of the chief who
intervenes as a point of subjectivation starting from which each Nazi properly fuses with the
dominant real which imposes some particular place on him in the corresponding society.

What function do these three strata serve? It seems to me that this is where social formations
function, namely the three great social orders are: you will be organized or otherwise you will
be depraved; the second is: you will signify and you will be signified, you will interpret and
you will be interpreted, or otherwise you will be a dangerous deviant; and you will be
subjectivated, that is to say fixed, your place assigned, and you will only move if the point of
subjectivation tells you to move, otherwise you will be a dangerous nomad. There is a
dominant reality of work, there is a dominant real of labor; this dominant real does not have
an invariable opening, it has a variable angle. This is what one will call the mobility of
manpower. The mobility of manpower is brought about starting from a point of subjectivation
specific to the capitalist formation, and which is the mobility of capital.

And starting from the 19th century, one of the essential problems for political economy had
been the comparative mobility of manpower, the mobility of the workforce in relation to the
mobility of capital: how to make it so that there is no mobility of labor that would exceed the
mobility of capital or which would be carried off in other directions. That would produce
nomads. And how to make it so that the workers agree to go where the mobility of capital,
that is to say, capitalist investment, goes? I would say that, under this aspect, capital taken in
its mobility is the mobility of the point of subjectivation on which depends the mobility of a
subject in the dominant real.

                                                                                                8

To the first stratum correspond the exclusions of the depraved, that is to say, those who make
their organism function according to a principle of useless energies, that is to say, those who
are not socially productive. And already, this depravity is a certain way in which someone
has blown up the organism or the organization of the body in order to rediscover something
of a body without organs, the BwO being essentially a captor of so-called useless energies.
To the second stratum corresponds the exclusion of the experimenter, the experimenter being
precisely the one who traces a domain of non-significance. And to the third stratum,
correspond the exclusions of the nomad.

We must continue to spread everything out on the same plane, this whole system is
connected, and this is the reason I’m fascinated by the text by [Antonin] Artaud, ‘To Have
Done with the Judgment of God’, where he only describes the first stratum, namely how one
makes the body into an organism, how one forces the body to take the form of an organism.
Hence Artaud’s cries: “My body has been stolen”8, that is to say: where I had a body as a
living body, I have been made into an organism. Now in fact, it is this triple system of the
three strata together which forms the judgment of God, that is to say the theological system.
And what is profoundly connected there are the activity of organization, the activity of
interpretation which corresponds to the stratum of signification, and the activity of
subjectivation.

And one can find them at all levels, that is to say, all regimes of organization imply this: once
again, you will be organized and you will organize, you will be interpreted and you will
interpret, you will be subjectivated and you will move as soon as someone tells you to. We
find that everywhere, and we can even call the system of the judgment of God, or the
despotic system, the totality of these three strata; or the imperial system. It is simply the
forms that differ: in every system – and once again, for the moment, it is a matter of putting
everything on the same plane – … Fascism: the problem would be: what is the type of
organization, including the organization of properly fascist bodies, what is the properly
fascist machine of interpretation and what are the points of subjectivization of fascism? And
it will be necessary to seek that for every imperial formation.

The conjugal apparatus is similar. We must consider it in the same way. The conjugal
relationship indeed implies a kind of organization of bodies which even has a whole
jurisdiction, namely the belonging of bodies between spouses; a certain principle of useful
energy, namely desire related to the lack; an angle of significance which constitutes the
properly conjugal machine of interpretation with its dominant real: ah, my kitchen, ah, my
children. This is the dominant real, and the point of subjectivization, which is often very
variable, the point of subjectivation can be the husband, the husband as chief: my husband,
that’s what he likes, I’m going to make him the dinner he likes this evening. There we have a
point of subjectivation from which the dominant real is cut out. Or else it’s the kid who takes
the role of the little boss [petit chef]; or maybe it’s the vacuum cleaner. You have infinite
points of subjectivation, they form little constellations.

We should carry out inquiries into households; we would take several households, and we
would fix their three strata: the organization of the body of the husband on the collective
body, or its non-organization; then the stratum of significance; and then the stratum of
subjectivation and the variations of points of subjectivation. One could analyze the imperial
machine in these terms, or the [psycho-]analytic machine. From the moment there is a
despotic formation, you always find the three strata that prevent the formation of a field of
immanence of desire. This is why, at this level of analysis, I can consider everything,

                                                                                                  9

formally, structurally, everything as equivalent: whether it is the Nazi despotic machine,
whether it is the conjugal machine, or whether it is the psychoanalytic machine. For the
moment, it doesn’t matter about the differences.

In the case of the psychoanalytic machine, we can push the analysis further. First, what plays
the role of the body without organs? There are always several bodies without organs nested
one inside the others; there is never just one. What plays the role of a body without organs is
first of all the cabinet of the analyst. Then the analyst, insofar as he does not listen or talk, is
made to function as a body without organs. But it is a BwO which is necessarily trapped since
it only functions as BwO in order to prevent the functioning of the body without organs, that
is to say, in order to trace on the BwO strata which will allow phenomena from the body
without organs to enter into the disciplinary units of the organization of significance and
subjectivation.

First question then: what is the analogue of a body without organs in psychoanalysis? Second
question: how does the organization of strata get made in psychoanalysis, or in conjugality, or
in fascism? There is also a fundamental organization, an organization of bodies which
happens in psychoanalysis. Then we would have to look into – because it is very variable –
we would have to interrogate the whole domain of the psychosomatic; or else it would vary
with the types of illness, for example, in the case of hysteria. It is obvious that there is a very
precise corporeal organization; and then – and this is the essential – in line with the formation
of the different strata, it is now this or now that stratum that will have a privilege over the
others.

In the psychoanalytic machine, the stratum which devours almost everything, at the limit, is
the stratum of signification, that is to say, its norms of significance: whatever you do, it
means something. Notice that that corresponds especially with the conjugal relation. It
perhaps refers even more to the contemporary conjugal relationship than to the facts of
childhood … [indistinct remarks]. In the conjugal relationship you have this interpretation
machine: ‘What did he do?’ What does that mean, ‘What did he do?’, this machine where
everything means something: ‘Wait, he does not like his soup today, what’s happened?’
That’s the exclusion of all right to a-significance. Everything has a signification, and we can
no longer do anything a-signifying. That’s the interpretation machine; it’s no one’s fault,
that’s what the thing is made for.

And then there are points of subjectivation. There was the point of subjectivation of the
childhood type: it was starting from childhood that the dominant real was determined, such as
it was traced through the cabinet of the analyst, and that helps explain why this thing is truly
a drug. How does analysis become, literally, their dominant real? Why do they end up
organizing their entire schedule from one session to the next, so that everything depends on
the next session? What’s going to happen next time? What will happen in the next session?
What happened in the last session? … It’s really like any despotic machine, the alignment of
a dominant reality in which one is subjectivated.

So, childhood was for a long time the psychoanalytical point of subjectivation, but now, with
guys like [Serge] Leclaire or [indistinct name], there’s no longer even any need for
childhood. They discover an even more artificial, even more perverse, point of subjectivation,
no longer the childhood scene, but the analytic scene in the closed cabinet of the analyst.9 It is
a displacement of the point of psychoanalytic subjectivation that is very important: the
psychoanalyst is no longer valid as the representative of the father and the mother, but is

                                                                                                 10

valid through himself, like a master of an axiomatic or of an accounting of desire, the truth of
desire no longer referring to a childhood reality, but referring to what happens in the cabinet.

So, with regard to the whole system, we can do this analysis to show how a body without
organs is there as a field of immanence of desire, and at the same time is completely
prevented from functioning by the organization of strata, that is to say, by the organization of
the volume of the organism, of the angle of significance and the points of subjectivation.

That is the first point that I wanted to take up. All the same, that gives us a set of concepts
that leads to an evident conclusion: in our enterprise of seeking the body without organs, in a
certain way, I can say that it is always there, whether you make it or not, it is always there.
It’s simply that if you don’t take the trouble to take it into your own hands and to make it
yourself, it is done to you, and it is done to you in accordance with the strata that prevent it
from functioning. At that moment, you are taken up into the system of organization, of
significance and subjectivation. In any case, it is there.

So, what to do? To make oneself a body without organs, what can that mean, since in any
case, there already is one.10 It means something very simple: to make one which is
destratified. To make one which functions. And to make one which functions, what does that
mean? It means, by all the evidence, to make one that has broken its triple bandage, its triple
link, its three strata, that is to say, to make one which, in a certain manner, has broken with
the organization of the organism; which, in another way, has broken with the angle of
significance; and which, in yet another way, is desubjectivated, that is to say, a body which is
discretely – I’ll explain later what I mean by ‘discretely’ –, the most discrete, the most
depraved, or the most disorganized, a-signifying and desubjectivated.

All that obviously refers to what happens on the body without organs, and this time, I’m only
defining it negatively. These are very practical tasks: kill the interpretation in yourself. The
machine of interpretation is the manipulation of the angle of significance. When I say that it
is necessary to be prudent, that comes down to saying that the constant danger, at the limit –
I’m dramatizing a little – is death. It’s because of that that the psychoanalysts, for example,
do not abandon the death instinct. In their incapacity to understand that the body without
organs is the life of desire in the raw state, in the pure state, it is desire in its plane of
consistency, in its field of immanence, because they have identified life with this artificial
pseudo-life of organization, signification and subjectivation; and in the face of any attempt to
blow up these three strata, they will say: this is the death drive; and in fact, it can be that.

At random, I’ll take the examples we’ve got: the drugged body.11 It’s quite obvious that, in a
certain way, it is a body that rediscovers itself as a body without organs; that is to say that it –
in one way or another, depending on the type of drug, it will not be in the same way – blows
up the stratum of organization. The maso: that’s the key perversion, because a perversion,
like fetishism, seems to me to be completely inscribed in the domain of strata. There is
something very cunning in fetishism, it’s that there is such a mobility to the point of
subjectivation, or such a derision, where the point of subjectivation being taken as a partial
object, the fetishist makes use of the point of subjectivation in such a cunning manner, that
his way of using it amounts to a way of suppressing it, even if he still passes through the
point of subjectivation. But take as examples the drugged body or the maso body: these are
ways of blowing up – even if, as you say, only for a certain time and artificially –, the
organization of the organism in order to rediscover a body without organs.

                                                                                                11

The second completely complementary attempt is no longer to blow up the organism for a
certain time and artificially, but to kill in oneself (and if possible in others) the machine of
interpretation: which is experimentation. To kill the interpretation machine; otherwise, you’re
fucked, you’re already caught up in a despotic regime of the sign where sign eternally refers
to sign, and where you can no longer have done with anything. Psychoanalysis is only the
most perfect of the interpretation machines in the capitalist system. But there are others, and
better known ones: religions, for example, in other social formations, are great machines of
significance or of interpretation; and there is even a religious use of drugs. It should be said
that we are never saved by anything.

There are even two dangers, that’s why I say patience and prudence are always necessary.
After all and once again, according to the principle of experimentation, nobody ever knows in
advance what is suitable for him; it takes a really long time to know. So fine, a guy can throw
himself into drugs, and then it turns out it’s not his thing, but he thinks it is his thing. A guy
can throw himself into drugs in such a way that he gets completely wasted. Well, that’s death,
it’s the death drive like the psychoanalysts say.

To arrive at no longer interpreting, to arrive at what is so moving … For example, the
machine of interpretation in the conjugal relationship is constantly nourished in the love
relationship, because when I say conjugal relationship, it is not a question of husband and
wife. It is not enough to not be married to not have conjugal relations. The MLF [Mouvement
de Libération des Femmes] is full of conjugal relationships; the FHAR [Front homosexuel
d’action révolutionnaire] is full of conjugal relationships; free communities secrete the
conjugal relationship. I use ‘conjugal relationships’ exactly as a synonym for the relation of
interpretation or the signifying relation where each asks themselves about the other: “He just
said that, what do I think that he thinks that I think? etc.”: at the end of the day, exactly what
Laing nicely called ‘knots’.12 From the moment there is a knot, there is an angle of
significance, something to interpret. “You’re in a bad mood, you’ve got that pinched look at
the corner of your mouth, why are you in a bad mood?” “No, no, I’m not in a bad mood …”

Once again, the peak of interpretation is when the psychoanalyst does not say a word. This is
the very height of interpretation. The guy leaves saying: “what a great session today.”
Someone told me that there are subjects like that in analysis who go for a month, sixth
months, two years, without the analyst saying a word, and it’s obviously because the
synthesis of signification is empty, he does not need to add anything to what he synthesizes.
It is an empty synthesis, a formal synthesis where the sign, instead of coupling with the thing
and working on a thing, the sign refers to another sign. No need to say anything; at the limit,
in the conjugal relationship, everything can be done by glances.

There are two kinds of people who are wrong: those who say that the real battle is on the
outside; the people who say that are the traditional Marxists: in order to change man, let’s
change the external world. And then there are the priests or the moralists who say: the real
battle is on the inside: let us change man. Bizarrely, in a completely different way, certain
Maoist depositions have taken up certain themes of this need to change man. What does that
mean: let’s change man first of all, the struggle must be interior first of all? Many Americans
have said that as well. What they mean when they are fully moralists and fully priests, is: the
battle on the outside is not necessary; the battle on the inside is the deepest, and the battle on
the inside is not the same as the pseudo-battle on the outside, which must be given up. The
battle on the inside is against our egoism, against our vices; it is against our temptations, that
is to say, it makes the three strata function.

                                                                                                12

For my part, I would like to say something completely different. I mean: the battle on the
inside, I understand very well what that means; anyway I think so. It should just be said that
the battle on the inside and the battle on the outside concern the same things. Institutions
crystallized on the inside and internal secretions within me: these are the same things. So that
a battle is indeed necessary, but a perpetual battle, a constant combat over the fact …
[indistinct sentences] … The conjugal relationship is crystallized in institutions that have a
certain power, but at the same time it is an internal secretion. Even if you don’t get married,
you participate in conjugality from the moment you make interpretations, from the moment
you make signification.

We have to constantly defeat this kind of gland which is in us and which produces
interpretation in correspondence with the significations crystallized on the outside. It is at the
same time that there is a whole system, a whole code of the signifier on the outside, and a
whole gland of interpretation inside us. The battle against jealousy, for example. Some might
well say – and they are partly right – “Well, I don’t feel jealous”. It doesn’t stop us saying at
some kink in the path, “Woah, shit, how do I feel about that?” We had a gland which, in a
less abundant form than others, had spread and confected jealousy. We weren’t aware of it,
and then, at some moment, it’s too late: we were doing nothing but that.

The Oedipus complex is an objective institution crystallized in society in the form of human
sex acts and rules of marriage; and it also completely governs the parent-child relationship.
But it is also completely a gland of internal secretion; Oedipus is part of the conjugal
relationship: think of conjugal relationships without children, the obscure sadness; there is
always one member of the couple who becomes the other’s child, who is mothered by the
other.

It is exactly the same revolutionary fight we have to engage with on the outside and on the
inside. Once again, how many revolutionaries think it’s enough … – I insist on this because
this is how I save myself from moralism; I am not saying there’s a battle on the inside which
is of a different nature to the battle on the outside, I’m saying there is a single and same
battle. It is strictly the same because fascism, that too is outside us and inside us – how many
revolutionary militants are there who treat their wife as not even a bourgeois has ever treated
his wife? How many are there who secrete conjugality to the point of shame? How many are
there even among the most courageous militants of the MLF, who secrete mothering and
interpretation, making the MLF the opposite of what a revolutionary group must be, that is to
say, instead of being a group for experimentation, it has become a group for interpretation.

I will take an example which seems quite fascinating to me, the possibility of a political
struggle against the conjugal relationship, against the Oedipal relationship, and I say each
time, since it is a question of detonating the strata which prevent us from acceding to the field
of immanence, to the plane of consistency of desire – once again, it is necessary to proceed
with caution: look at the difference between a drug user who gets completely wasted and a
drug user who knows how to handle his stuff. That seems to me to be the art of
experimentation. Experimentation implies prudence; the risk is obviously the opposite of
destratifying, the risk of suicide. That comes partly from treating the battle solely as a battle
against the outside. If we don’t know that Oedipus, fascism, the little chief, is also in us – and
again, we see revolutionaries who are right little bosses at the very moment they are leading
the external battle against the little bosses, against the factory foremen –, there once again
you have a slippage. They don’t lead the way in internal experimentation in the same way as

                                                                                                 13

they lead the way in external experimentation. Here I believe it’s truly a single and same
battle, which we can’t get out of, whichever stratum we want to detonate.

And the most dangerous, the most deadly, are attempts to undo something of the
experimentation of the body, of the organization of the body into the organism. To become
disorganized, meticulously to [word not clear] … literally a higher life, or what Nietzsche
called the great Health, to undo signification and interpretations, not in order to become some
kind of moron, but in order to conduct real experimentation, that is to say to become an
experimenter, and finally to become a nomad even in the place one is, that is to say to undo
the points of subjectivation; all that is extremely difficult. It is not enough to get the hell out
to become nomadic; it is not enough to cease to interpret in order to become an experimenter;
and above all it is not enough to disorganize the organism to become a body without organs
with things happening on it. Every time, it can be death, above all when you are no longer
supported by the strata. And the strata function as bandages, in a certain sense; they prevent
you from breaking up.

What always fascinates me is the coexistence of the two, of the types, the way in which the
types rub shoulders the whole time – the possible breaking up and then the experimentation.
So that if one does not tread very carefully – see Castaneda … And in all these attempts,
there is a fear, and there is every reason to have fear, not only at the most obvious level of
disorganization, but even at the level of desubjectivation. It’s because the anchoring points
from the point of subjectivation are very precious to you; when there are no longer any
anchoring points a kind of anxiety starts up; there are all sorts of formations of anxiety which
correspond to defection from the strata.13

There, I’ve talked about a whole bunch of notions, and I would like you to complete them.

A student: I had the impression that you conceived the drugged body as something external;
in fact, I think that, by definition, every body is drugged from the beginning. It would be
necessary to look at the different kinds of drugs …

Deleuze: If you give that extension to the word drugs, there are two kinds of drug use: the
machine of interpretation, psychoanalysis, that’s a drug; the conjugal relationship is a drug;
and these are drugs whose use is specifically in conformity with stratifications …
[Interruption of the recording]

Richard [Pinhas]: You didn’t dwell that much on what constituted the masked real, and I
was wondering if, in relation to the dominant real, at the level of the productive assemblages
of statements, one could not propose the hypothesis that, corresponding to this double
approach dominant real – masked real, there might be at the level of statements also a double
approach. Namely: already constituted statements which are always the repetition of
structures, or of relays, of networks which are those, roughly speaking, of domination, of
signifying effects which reproduce the law, the law in the sense of domination; and on the
other side, at the other pole, points, event-based particles that one could call enunciations, as
opposed to statements already in place, already constituted and bringing repetition;
enunciations which, by virtue of nothing other than their innovative nature, experimental if
you like, already explode, just by their presence, certain relays, certain networks of already
constituted statements.

                                                                                                  14

Deleuze: Okay, yes, okay; I haven’t yet spoken of the masked real, because the masked real
is precisely what happens on the body without organs when it is destratified. The dominant
real is what masks the masked real, exactly in the same way as it takes up phenomena proper
to the body without organs into statistical ensembles.

What interested me was a study on muscle tone, a study of the tonus as biological given. Or
do you see other strata, then? For my part, I don’t see any others; very broadly speaking, it
seemed to me that there are the three great ones, and they are linked together: I will make you
an organism, I will make you an interpreter, and I will subjectivate you. That is the
theological system. What remains for us to see is what happens on the body without organs,
underneath the strata, and each time, it will be necessary to show how it is the inverse side of
the strata.

So, at the same time as the body without organs destratifies itself, things happen on it, it’s
contemporary. What order of things, and how are they opposed to strata? I am just going to
make a kind of list of things which happen on the body without organs. First, distributions of
intensities; the body without organs from this point of view is truly intensity = 0, but taken as
matrix of all intensities or the principle of all productions of intensities.14 So that what
happens on the body without organs is a distribution of intensities, and in this sense, the BwO
is not only matrix of production of intensities, it is also a map of distribution of intensities.

And yet ‘map of distribution’ is poorly put, and the less poorly put it is, the better it works,
because map, that indicates something spatial, and the body without organs is not space, it
belongs to matter insofar as it fills space according to such and such a degree of intensity, that
is to say, according to the degree of the intensities which pass on it. Here there is already a
whole domain: the intensities distributed on the body without organs. Now, the intensities are
opposed, in the stratum of the organism, they are opposed to the world of representation.
Intensities are fundamentally non-representative, they represent nothing, and it is in this sense
that they will be a fundamental element in the machine of experimentation, as opposed to the
machine of interpretation. I am restituting intensities as fundamental.

The second thing that transpires, and it is perhaps the same thing, is multiplicities. I say that it
is perhaps the same thing because these multiplicities which are produced on the body
without organs are precisely intensive multiplicities, and multiplicity belongs fundamentally
to intensity. In what sense? In a very precise sense, namely that it is necessary to call
intensive quantity any multiplicity that is apprehended in the instant. From the moment there
is a multiplicity apprehended as multiplicity in an instant, there is intensive quantity. In the
domain of extension, it is the opposite. What is apprehended in an instant is thereby posited
as unity, and multiplicity can only be apprehended successively.

If it is true that intensities are opposed to the world of representation at the level of the strata,
multiplicities are slightly different. They are opposed to extensive quantities or to qualitative
forms which also in turn make up part of the strata at several levels, as much of the stratum of
organization as of the stratum of signification. We have seen that one type of fundamental
intensive multiplicity was a multiplicity that one could call a pack, as opposed to the
extensive multiplicities of mass. The extensive multiplicities of mass are rather on the side of
the strata, and the intensive multiplicities of packs are rather on the side of the body without
organs and of its liberation with regard to the strata.

                                                                                               15

Third thing which happens on the body without organs: these are the flows. And again, this is
another way of saying the same thing; why? Flows are not the same thing as intensive
quantities, but intensive quantities are always measures of flow. And it is not surprising
because intensive quantities, being themselves multiplicities, multiplicities being themselves
intensive quantities, intensities being themselves multiplicities, an intensity, that does not
mean anything by itself, it does not mean anything. An intensity can only signify a difference
of intensity, a difference between a maximum and a minimum, between a higher intensity and
a lower intensity, beyond the putting in relation of two intensities under the conditions of
their being put in relation.

And there, that’s a whole problem, to know under what physical, aetiological conditions
intensities enter into a relation, because supposing that the intensities enter into relation on
the basis of a constitutive inequality, because they are completely unequal, and it is relations
of inequality that define the difference of intensities, something happens, something flows
which is precisely a flow from one intensity to the other, and the direction of the flow is
determined by the passage from the highest to the lowest, or can be determined as being
either in the direction of entropy, or in the direction of negentropy.

Fourth determination – but you have to sense that it’s the same thing; all that, it’s aspects of
the same thing – free machinic connections, the whole domain of machinic connections, in
opposing free connections to two kinds of other connections or relations: mechanical
relations or finalist relations. For mechanical relations and relations of finality are
constitutive of the organism. On the contrary, the domain of machinic connections, when two
things make machines out of each other … One could pose this problem: under what
conditions can two things, two beings or any two things whatever be said to form a machinic
connection: what is necessary and under which circumstances are such connections formed?
– but that’s not a part of the problems that remain to us. In any case, these machinic
connections which are assumed to happen on the body without organs constitute precisely the
whole domain of machines it is necessary to call a-signifying: they do not mean anything;
they are defined uniquely by their use, their functioning, that’s all; they are not the object of
interpretations, any more than intensities are objects of interpretation. The fourth domain is
that of a-signifying machines.

These a-signifying machines are particularly connected to a regime that I called for
convenience sake the sign-particle regime, and this is opposed to the strata since the strata, at
least the second one, the stratum of significance, implies a completely different regime of
sign, the regime of the sign under the signifier, and from the beginning I have attempted to
oppose the regime of the sign-particle to the regime where sign refers to sign to infinity,
under a signifier which constitutes the machine of interpretation. On the contrary, the
machine of experimentation on the body without organs is the sign-particle couple.

Sixth possible determination of what happens on the body without organs, as opposed to the
strata: it would be necessary to say that the strata define territories or processes of
reterritorialization. What happens on the BwO, and this is why the BwO as intensive matrix
is a desert, the desert not being at all something empty and depopulated, but being precisely
the place inhabited by intensive multiplicities, by a pack, it is the place of packs … What
happens on the BwO at this level, as opposed to the territorialities, are lines of
deterritorialization. [End of the recording and of the session]

Notes

                                                                                                              16

  The session referred to was presumably not recorded.
  Faire un enfant is a common French expression for ‘to have a baby’, or ‘to have a child’.
  Although the identity of the biologist and the study in question are unknown, the topic is framed here in a way
that is consistent with the ideas from Raymond Ruyer, who is mentioned by name at the end of this section on
the ‘stratum of organization’ (see footnote 4). Ruyer developed a distinction between ‘primary’ and ‘secondary’
(or statistical) sciences in his Éléments de psycho-biologie [Elements of Psycho-Biology] (Paris: PUF, 1946), cf.
Introduction, pp. 1-20. In The Genesis of Living Forms (translated by Jon Roffe and Nicholas B. de Weydenthal,
London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2020 [1958], there is a brief discussion of how the “contractile properties of
molecules” play a role in “muscular contraction” (p. 42). Nevertheless, the unidentified study on the tonus
musculaire is clearly by a different author.
  See Raymond Ruyer, The Genesis of Living Forms, Chapter 11, ‘Forms I, II and III’, pp. 147-156.
  See Louis Hjelmslev, Prolegomena to a Theory of Language, translated by Francis J. Whitfield, Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1969 [1943]. For discussions by Deleuze and Guattari of Hjelmslev’s linguistics,
see Anti-Oedipus (translated by Robert Hurley, Mark Seem and Helen R. Lane, Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1983 [1972]), pp. 242-243, and A Thousand Plateaus (translated by Brian Massumi,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988 [1980]), pp. 43-45, 99, 108, 528 n. 46.
  See A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 129-132, where this concept is introduced.
  On the chief or leader, see Sigmund Freud, Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (translated by James
Strachey, Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud (London: Hogarth Press,
1955 [1921], Vol. 18), Chapter V, ‘Two Artificial Groups: The Church and the Army.’
   The phrase On a volé mon corps [“My body has been stolen”] does not occur in Pour en finir avec la
jugement de Dieu [‘To Have Done with the Judgment of God’ (1947)], but Artaud does talk of la suffocation/ en
moi/ de l’idée de corps [“the suffocation in me of the idea of the body”], ‘To Have Done with the Judgment of
God’, in Antonin Artaud, Selected Writings (edited by Susan Sontag, translated by Helen Weaver, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1976), p. 567 (translation modified). Artaud’s use of the phrase corps sans
organes [the body without organs] can be found on p. 571. Cf. the discussions of Artaud in A Thousand
Plateaus, pp. 150, 163.
  Cf. Serge Leclaire, Psychoanalyzing (translated by Peggy Kamuf, Stanford: Stanford University, 1998 [1968],
chapter 1.
   The plateau of A Thousand Plateaus addressed to this problem, ‘November 28, 1947: How Do You Make
Yourself a Body without Organs?’, was first published in Minuit, 10, September 1974.
   In this regard, see pp. 150-154 in A Thousand Plateaus.
   R.D. Laing, Knots (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1971 [1970]).
   On Castaneda with regard to experimentation, see Sessions 1 and 2 of this Seminar, and A Thousand Plateaus,
pp. 227-228.
   See the discussion in A Thousand Plateaus, p. 189.