1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema: The Movement-Image

Lecture 13, 16 March 1982

Transcribed by Lucie Dubus (Part 1, 1:04:05) and Yaelle Tannau (Part 2, 59:04); additional
revisions to the transcription and time stamp: Charles J. Stivale
Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1
[Session begins in medias res, with a student making comments]
Student: [Almost inaudible remarks… reference to Eisenstein and to 19th century
mysticism…] … I see an absolute self... does it have anything to do with the category of the
impersonal?
Deleuze: These quotations that you were reading, who are they from? Who are the quotes
from?
Student: [Inaudible answer]
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes... The rigor of the question worries me… Here's what's happening. I
want you to be able to sense these things for yourselves. Indeed, suppose I say – and as I have
already said this, suppose I say it again – we group in the category of "firstness" a certain
number of states whose only common feature is the fact that they have no relation to a "self,"
and that they are without spatio-temporal coordinates. That's what I want to say. You see, on
the basis of this, we have something like a first group. But I have to say that not everything is
like that… There is also, as we have seen, “secondness”, and then there is “thirdness”. I'm not
specifying – once I've made this first... I wouldn't even call it a definition... this initial,
extremely broad grouping of firstness – I'm not specifying if there is, assuming that there is...
The first question you could ask me is: Do such states exist? Here I would say that it's not a
matter of taste but a matter of philosophical taste. Because what does this question – Do such
states exist – mean exactly? It could mean: do such states appear in a pure state? Then, I
suppose, there will be some among us... there will be a certain number who will say: Firstness
doesn't mean anything. But that would simply mean that I shouldn't use it, if this is the way I
see things. I shouldn't use it. Which would be quite legitimate, quite legitimate.
Second possible reaction… Ah, yes, firstness, that says something to me! And indeed, in your
experience, you might say to yourself: Ah yes! I've known states of this type, states that I've
experienced as having no relation to me and having no relation to a determined space-time.
Or else, the third possible reaction: Yes, I can clearly see what he means… You might say to
yourself, I suppose, I can clearly see what he means, but these aren't pure states, at best they
might be a pole of certain experiences. Which would mean that what you call firstness can
never exist in a pure state… It's an abstract pole of experience that you have the right to draw

                                                                                                      2

out. But it's clear that all concrete states include an aspect of firstness, even if they also have
other aspects.
So, that's why, concerning the questions you pose, and without meaning to be polemical, very
often I want to reply: it's only the person who asks the question who has the means to answer
it. In certain cases... If you say to me, for example, well, what did Peirce mean exactly by
firstness or secondness, I didn't understand... In that case I can answer, or try to answer, by
beginning… by attempting to take up the analysis in a different way. But I'll go back to the
example of the question you just asked me. In my view, I can only answer this: look in the
texts that you've found. First of all, you give me two quotations. Well, I can hardly manage to
get to grips with these two quotations. But I would say that the first one, as you yourself said,
pretty much goes in the direction of "a state without relation to the self". And indeed, it is a
mystical state. Remember, it should also be added that in what we have vaguely defined as
firstness, we ought to ask ourselves the question – and there too, you can have different kinds
of states – supposing that such states exist, we should ask ourselves: In what kind of
experience are they present? And here it's very varied. Last time we saw that it could be the
experience of sleep but it could also be the experience, or certain experiences, of delirium,
certain experiences of a schizophrenic type, or then again it could be certain mystical
experiences. And we didn’t at all mean to say that these were the same thing. It was simply an
aspect of the kind of experience that could be equally discovered in certain experiences of
sleep, in certain experiences of schizophrenic processes and in certain mystical experiences.
Okay.
Concerning this you might say to me: Yes, but mystical experience cannot be not reduced to
this since there are certain aspects of mystical experience where there can be a reference to a
“self”. There I would say – and I'm not looking to debate this – but I would say, I'm not quite
sure... I believe that when the "self" intervenes in a process of mystical experience, it is no
longer in the condition of pure mystical experience... There has been a shift from mystical
experience to what could be called the "realm of faith", which is not at all the same thing. But,
even if you were to answer me: No, no, it is part of mystical experience, then I would say:
Okay, that's because mystical experience contains both a pole of firstness and some aspects of
secondness.
All this is a way of saying that if you refer to something we have studied, that we've all
looked at together… But if you refer that to your own problem, well of course I can help you
give an order to your problem or to what material you bring, but I don't have the answer, only
you can answer that. In any case, I never said that mystical experience is this or that, because I
am completely incapable of talking about mystical experience. All I said was that certain
aspects, according to the mystics' own accounts of their experience... certain aspects insist on
the impossibility of relating mystical experience to a “self" and of relating mystical
experience to spatio-temporal coordinates. That's all. Perhaps you're right in saying that there
are other elements involved in mystical experience, perhaps... all fine and good. In particular,
I would say that there is surely an element of thirdness, to use Peirce's terms. That is to say,
there is a form of thought involved in mystical experience, but this is quite normal. You
understand? What I mean is that you absolutely shouldn't close down these categories. You
absolutely mustn't close them. You have to leave something open... Well, at the end of the day
maybe all experience has its aspects of firstness, secondness, thirdness. Yes, clearly this is the
case. It's simply that such and such an experience accentuates or puts the emphasis on... or
even just presents a moment where you have an almost pure firstness etc. Yes?

                                                                                                   3

A student: [Inaudible remarks around the affection-image and the extent to which Bergson's
remarks can be compared to those of Maine de Biran, considered in the previous session,
followed by a question as to why Deleuze seems to have entirely left Bergson behind]
Deleuze: Yes. You're so harsh on me! This is what I would say: strictly speaking, it's true
what you say. If I had decided, out of vanity, to stick to Bergson as my only thread, I would
have had no need to make any reference to Maine de Biran, nor to Peirce. I just want to note
that if Bergson was able to so easily replace Maine de Biran, it is because he knew him very
well. So why did I insist? I can say that in the end, our only effective guide has been Bergson,
and why? So as to sketch out the distinction we made between our three images: the
perception-image, the affection-image and the action-image. But as you have sensed – I don't
even need to say this – we left Bergson behind some time ago. All that we have seen, all that
we have said, is not something he himself says. I'm not trying to make him say things he
hasn't said. He has simply been of use to us, and that's all. Both for me and for you, it has to
work like this: we shouldn't try to make a great philosopher say what he didn't say, but we
have to make full use of him, we have to consider what he said as something we can use, we
have to make use of it.
Why did I feel the need to make a detour? I say this because it's shameful and yet at the same
time it's quite respectable... because I though, here we have a good opportunity to teach them
something… I'm sure they can't know much, or even anything at all, about Maine de Biran,
and they won't yet have encountered Peirce. So it's now or never. And it's fully justified if I've
given even just two or three of you the desire to read Peirce or Maine de Biran. But I also had
to do it for other reasons.
It's that Peirce's categories, for example – firstness, secondness, thirdness – it seems to me
they will allow us to get going again. And in this sense, in fact, it goes beyond Bergson, it
doesn't contradict what he says, it's just a completely different kind of problem that I have to
unpack. Have I really forgotten Bergson in all this time? Because I remind you that, in the
first term, we devoted one and then a second time… so two entire sessions, to a commentary
on Matter and Memory. And in these two sessions we did no more than cover the first chapter
of Matter and Memory. So, I haven't forgotten at all, and if we have time after Easter, we will
go back to Matter and Memory but this time it will be exclusively to look at the second and
third chapters, so that, by the end of the year, I would like to have covered everything in
Matter and Memory. But if I now introduce secondness, thirdness and firstness, it's because,
in a way, this will allow us to rethink the three types of image that we had drawn from
Bergson, and it will perhaps also allow us to push our analysis of the action-image much
further – not than Bergson himself – but further than Bergson gives us the means to do… So
there it is, now we have to go on. And indeed... yes?
Georges Comtesse: Concerning the question that was asked about mysticism, one could
perhaps say that it is not so far from Bergson's own relationship to mysticism because he
himself once declared that the metaphysical experience of the deep self led to mystical
experience. And he went on to add that that he believed this is where the truth lies. In other
words, in Bergson, there is a link between metaphysical experience and the truth of
mysticism. This is my first remark.
As a second remark: when you say that in mysticism, obviously, mystical experimentation,
mystical rupture differs from simple faith, in the sense, for example, of a religious faith that
would refer simply to a god, to a given belief or that would even be channeled by a given
clerical power of some kind, okay... Yet it must also be said that in mysticism there is a

                                                                                                       4

certain faith involved, if only because of what all illnesses imply, namely a mystical faith in
death, and this is precisely the limit and certainly the truth of the illness. For example, I recall
a conference in Brussels, where Lacan had this to say about ill people: he said, death,
supposing one didn't believe in it, that is to say, if it wasn't an object of great belief for us…
would we be able to live in the same way? In other words, he directly posed the question of
illness's relation to faith, illness as a mystical faith in death. That's my second point.
A third remark concerns what you said at the end of the last lesson, and there was someone
who didn't understand... who didn't dare ask a question about... Yes, yes, it's odd how we can
ask questions, but there are apparently some people who are often inhibited from doing so,
whereas in principle it would be completely possible to understand a discourse like this...
Well, anyway, there was someone who didn't understand the relationship between the sinsign,
the qualisign and the legisign. And I thought of an example in cinema, the example of Alfred
Hitchcock's film Marnie.1 In Marnie you have an example of Peirce's theory of the sign in
itself since we have the sign of what is for Marnie a state of things in her traumatic reaction to
red flowers... we don't know why she is upset, what connection this has with her compulsion
to steal money. This is the sinsign, which is embodied in a state of things, the red flowers that
upset her. Then there is the qualisign, the color in itself, the color red as it is, which invades
the whole screen and isn't just embodied in the flowers. And then there is the mediation at the
end of the film, that is, the scene with the mother and the little girl who kills the sailor and
which is the law of the color. This is an example...
Deleuze: And why... I haven't seen Marnie... Why... what role does red play in the third
image?
Georges Comtesse: I think that in this scene, Hitchcock proposes an interpretation, which by
the way is quite ironic, of the whole film, perhaps for his own amusement, I don't know, but
he tries to explain how the color red relates to Marnie's shyness, which is linked to a
childhood scene, a primal scene where the mother, because she didn't have any money, she'd
been dumped, so she had to prostitute herself with sailors. And one day, there was a sailor
who came, and while the little girl, who is Marnie as a small child, was sleeping, the sailor
violated, brutalized the mother beyond measure, and she... and the mother and daughter killed
him... So there is the mediation of red.
Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes... I see, that's a very good example, a quite excellent example you've
given me… It's a good example. Yes, very good. Well, so this leads us to the next thing… that
is, we're already in the domain of the action-image. You remember… In a word, firstness – to
use Peirce's term – firstness is the affective, but not in just any sense of affect, in the sense of
power-quality. Secondness is action, the effort-resistance relation, and thirdness, in the
broadest sense, is the mental sphere. This division of the world, this division of images into
three types, seemed rather bizarre to us. When we thought we had finished with the affectionimage, we naturally entered the realm of the action-image.
Now the action-image, as we were saying, is secondness, that is, not only is it what comes
second – the logical order is not so important – but it is that which in itself is two, as opposed
to the power-quality which in itself is one and refers only to itself. It is that which in itself is
two. Let us now try to define what the action-image is composed of. We have to take it in the
broadest sense. Firstly, after all, secondness, I would suggest that – and this accords with
Peirce's analyses dealing with a completely different subject – that, in fact, there are two
forms of secondness. There are two secondnesses. You see we can't get away from the two.
There are two secondnesses. Let's say that there is a kind of primary secondness, that is, a

                                                                                                   5

secondness – we have to be quite literal about all this – that would still be very close to
firstness. It would no longer be firstness, but as a secondness in itself, it would be a primary
secondness.
What is primary secondness? As we have seen, it is when one or several power-qualities are
effectuated or actualized in a state of things. And this is exactly – it responds to Peirce's
notion – the sinsign.2 The power-quality in itself was a qualisign; when the power-quality is
actualized in a state of things, we have a sinsign. There is already secondness since you have
"power-quality", on the one hand, and a state of things that actualizes it on the other. It's a
primary secondness. The whole, therefore, you would call a sinsign. It is... For example, the
qualisign, was “the rainy” or “rain”, whereas the sinsign is “this rainy day”. This time, the
power-quality, "the rainy", is actualized in a determined state of things: this day, here and
now. So what we have here is the actualization in a determined space-time.
You see that this is already sufficient to distinguish it from the domain of affection. We had
seen the role played by the any-space-whatever. Now, in the case of action-images, the space
will no longer be any-space-whatever; it will be a space in the here-and-now, that is, a space
defined by its spatio-temporal coordinates. I hope that this is quite clear. So, there we have the
first aspect of the action-image. We can choose to call it many things – and we will see why –
a world, a milieu, a situation. We can choose or maybe not. Perhaps world, milieu and
situation have hidden nuances, perhaps there will be nuances. But this is the first aspect of the
action-image.
And then I would add that there is a secondary secondness… that this time we could call true
secondness, a secondness that is true, because you feel that the first secondness is still very
close to firstness, that there are imperceptible transitions from firstness to primary secondness.
True secondness appears, this time, not at the level of the actual world or of the determined
state of things, or of the situation, it appears at the level of pure and simple action. The
situation, in one way or another, generates an action that will react upon the situation. The
situation or the milieu will generate, give rise to an action that will react upon the milieu, so
the action, both under its aspect of effort-resistance and under its aspect of action-reaction,
always implies "two".
Action, what is action? It is the duel… Action implies the relation between at least two forces,
effort-resistance, action-reaction – whether these forces are distributed between two people or
between a person and a thing... All sorts of combinations are possible, but for the beginning of
our analysis we can roughly accept the formula: action is the duel. And that is true
secondness… We'll be less surprised, in the end... Well, you remember, when the sign,
according to Peirce... when the sign is of the dual type, action-reaction, effort-resistance – for
example, my effort is the sign of the resistance that I face, or conversely the resistance that I
face is the sign of my action. These signs of duel, where a term, an existing term... where
something actually existing becomes a sign of another actually existing entity, is what Peirce
called, in the table we looked at last time, an index.
So, in the same way, I can already conclude, because it seems very important to me that we
establish... what I mean is two contradictory things at the same time. What seems to me very
important is that we establish our terminology – since these terms are real concepts – and at
the same time it’s important that you don't harden them, that you get the feeling that we can
go from one to another in a very subtle way. If I try to summarize, I would say, well yes, the
action-image begins, on the one hand, when the qualisign becomes a sinsign and, on the other
hand, when the icon becomes an index. Affection-images were qualisigns and icons. The

                                                                                                     6

qualisign was the power-quality exposed in an any-space-whatever. The icon was the powerquality expressed by a face.
You see how the action-image supposes that we have left this domain of affection-images: we
are no longer in the domain of the qualisigns, we are in the domain of sinsigns – that is,
power-qualities actualized in a determined state of things. And we are no longer in the domain
of icons, we are in the domain of indices – that is, of actions that proceed by way of duels.
Now, in my concern to always keep to these two poles so as to be able to carry out my
analysis, don't I also have another complementary concern, namely that these two poles
shouldn't be superimposed on the two poles of other types of images? In other words, aren't
we in the process of discovering what would be the two poles of the action-image, which we
could roughly call: the situation or the sinsign on one hand and the action, the duel or index,
on the other? And the whole action-image would unfold not in a fixed order, but from one
pole to the other or vice versa.
After all, we have a long way to travel. Here, we are immediately struck by something, if you
will. What immediately strikes us is that, from a situation to an action... what will have to be
done to be able to legitimately pass from one to the other, or from an action to a situation, at
the level of the image, at the level of the cinema image? What is at stake here is a whole mode
of narration, of storytelling, it's a whole cinematographic logic. What intermediaries will be
needed? I would say, the situation gives rise to an action, and the action reacts upon the
situation. That's fine. But at what cost? How do we get from the situation to the duel?
The action-duel is something you find everywhere in the action-image in cinema, you find it
all over. If I look for it in different genres… in the western it goes without saying; in the
historical film, as soon as you have a battle, with all sorts of problems… because after all,
where is the real duel? The good thing about the action-image in cinema, we will see why, is
that we never know where the real duel is. It is never where you think it is. It's like a
dovetailing of duels one inside the other. Why is there necessarily a dovetailing of duels one
inside the other? Oh, I thought the duel was between such and such... such and such a
character in the story, and then I realized at another level that that wasn't the case. It happens
between a third and a fourth, or between the second and the third. The duel is never where I
think it is.
But if there is this dovetailing of duels, it is because the passage of the situation... that requires
action to be resolved... the passage of the situation to action is not at all self-evident. And
what exactly is the element of action? What is the action that will resolve the situation or react
upon the situation? There is, if you like, a whole system of approximations that will be the
making of the pleasures of cinema, that is to say the discovery of a narrative, the discovery of
a story whereby, in order to pass from the situation to the duel, to the duel-action, one needs a
considerable number of intermediaries. And for the duel to redound on the situation – except
in certain cases... to tell the truth I know of only one case... so beautiful and so funny – but
imagine a film where one proposed to show an immediate transformation of a situation into a
duel, to put it bluntly, a film where one would propose to show immediately the brutal
transformation of a sinsign to an index. If such a thing occurred, everyone would laugh. In
other words, this could only happen in a specific genre, burlesque comedy. It's not easy to do.
I can think of only one case, a single case… which is so funny, but I say all this because, in
recounting it, there won't necessarily be anything to laugh about. And those of you who recall
the scene will understand... There is a W.C. Fields3 film, which is a real marvel, and which is
his great Shakespearean film, though I don't remember the title either in English or in

                                                                                                   7

French…4 There, he shows all his talent. What an actor he would have been doing
Shakespearean theater! What a brilliant Falstaff Fields would have made! But, but, but… he
is... he is in his cabin... in his cabin in the north, it is snowing everywhere and so... does
nobody remember what it's called?
A student: [Inaudible reply]
Deleuze: Anyway… He's got his hat on, he's got his great fur hat on and everything. He's paid
a visit by his son... he's going to clobber the son. You have Shakespearean soirees where they
go on saying goodbye: Goodbye, father… Goodbye, son! For ten minutes. All these
goodbyes. Then there is a classic Fields gag... What?
The student: [The same student suggests a title and reminds him of details]
Deleuze: Maybe... That's it! He's going to milk the moose. He keeps opening the door all the
time, he rhythmically opens the door, and he says: "Weather's not fit to put a dog out!" in a
pure Shakespearean voice. He immediately gets two snowballs in the face! You see why this
is burlesque. "Weather's not fit to put a dog out!" Indeed, you see the wind, the ice, the snow
and so on. It's an image of a situation. And as soon as he says this, he receives the two
snowballs in the face, as if someone had thrown them. This is the immediate transmutation of
the situation into a duel. And then, when we see the image, not when I recount it, but when we
see the image, we are indeed seized with laughter... because we had precisely this situation...
this immediate transformation, this transformation happening on the spot. But otherwise, it is
very complicated.
And this will constitute the object... and undoubtedly all the great directors will recognize
themselves in certain styles of action cinema, where action-images prevail... they will
recognize themselves in these two poles, and in the way in which they combine these two
poles, the sinsign pole and the index pole, the first secondness and the second secondness.
That is, I remind you that the action-image oscillates from one pole to the other: the first pole
is, once again, that of power-qualities, that is to say, affects as actualized in determined states
of things; the second pole refers to the actions that, in the form of duels, will arise from the
state of things and react upon the state of things. There you have it, but unless... actually,
we've already gone too fast, because I'm saying... we should go back. As soon as we have the
impression that we're going too fast, we should go back a little. Power-qualities are actualized
in a state of things… This is what we could call a milieu: a milieu is made up of actualized
power-qualities… And this will develop into action-reactions.
So, what I'm saying is: aren't we going too fast? Too fast? And from what point of view
would it be too fast? Perhaps that, let's suppose, certain directors of genius can try to grasp the
actualization – since we are indeed in the field of the action-image, that is to say, the process
of actualization. These directors of genius might perhaps say to themselves: okay, we are
going to take things from an earlier point... but this is not enough. Suppose we could play a
radio quiz game. I'm not going to name the directors I'm thinking of. No, actually we're going
to play an anti-radio quiz, because if you guess the names, you lose, because it will mean my
description was so accurate that I deserve to win, and if you don't guess them, you win
because my description will have been false, my idea about them will have been false... So I
won't say which directors.
And so they say to themselves: before power-qualities are actualized in milieux, in
determined space-times, they are actualized, let's say, in "worlds". In worlds! In worlds... and
what does this mean? As in the birth of a world. For there to be actualization, it is necessary

                                                                                                    8

that a world be born. Cinema, under its aspect action-image, must give us to witness the birth
of a world. And yet, and yet we will show you – remember that it's these directors speaking –
and yet we will show you perfectly determined states of things. We will show you milieux...
whether fictional or real, it matters little. We will show you mountains, we will show you
casinos. We will show you – don't try too hard to guess who I'm thinking of… I don't think it's
of any interest – we will show you fictitious princedoms, we will show you apartment rooms
etc.
But you will see that through our art – I always let them do the talking – you will see that
through our art, you will not only simply seize them, you will seize them as determined spacetimes, but at the same time you will seize them like the birth of a world. They make us
witness, I mean... they are at the same time completely determined milieux... [43:17]
[Interruption of the recording: the paragraph that follows is provided by the transcription
available at Paris 8]
… and worlds born under our eyes. These determined milieux stand for an originary world.
They will say that the world is continually being reborn, the world continues to be born, at
each moment of the story, and it is up to the cinema to show this aspect by which the world is
continually reborn.
In other words… every determined milieu is as though doubled by an originary world that
will take its place. But originary doesn't mean the world of nature "before". It's in the hereand-now that milieux, if you know how to grasp them at a sufficiently profound level, stand
for originary worlds… This sounds odd. And I would say that this is the fundamental
ambition of… well, what could wecall it? If the action-image, which I was rushing towards
earlier, situation-action – and then I realized I was going too fast – if situation-action provides
the schema for one of these two types of secondness, then let's give it a name: this is what we
shall call realism.
Milieu-action, reaction upon the milieu, this is realism. If we try to establish a concept of
realism, this is what realism is. But when the milieux give way to originary worlds, when
determined states of things give way to an originary world that stands for them, in the hereand-now, what do we have then? It is no longer the endeavor... you sense that there is
something which surpasses realism. It seems, in a way – and this is how we recognize these
particular figures of cinema – it seems that the world itself begins only with the film, only
with the images that it shows. In the case of the realists, that's not the way things are. The
images the realists show refer to a pre-existing world, which is to say that the film is supposed
to be caught in the current of something that overflows it. But here it's not the case. With the
film, we witness the birth of a world. Nothing precedes it and nothing will follow. Nothing
precedes and nothing will follow, so what would this be? It is the ambition that surpasses
realism, and that once again borrows from it.
But to reconstitute the originary world, this has always been the ambition... an ambition, it
seems to me, both secret and profound, of what is called naturalism. And naturalism, as you
all know, does not refer to the world of nature. It refers to determined time-spaces. Yet unlike
realism, these are determined time-spaces from which we wrest the value of the originary
world. And in literature, the inventor of all this, it seems to me, the amazing inventor of this,
was Zola.5 And it was Zola, who became famous for his bizarre constructions that are at the
same time his strength and his weakness... a very, very curious form of literary construction
whereby he takes a subject and exhausts it. He is, if you like, the anti-Balzac.

                                                                                                   9

In a sense, Balzac6 is way ahead of Zola. The Zola method has a rather quaint aspect, and yet
at the same time, if we return to his quaint project… well, okay, it is rather quaint in one
respect, but from other perspectives it's highly innovative. You see, his novelty is the way he
proceeds in stages. If he writes a novel about money, well, the subject has to be exhausted. If
he writes a novel about alcoholism... there you have a set of frescoes, each of which is
supposed to exhaust its subject. It's not at all the same system running from one novel to
another where you have all sorts of links and cross-references, etc. This method that consists
in really going to the end of a world... this is naturalism. And this can only be understood if
you understand, if you grasp, in naturalism, this essential element, this very beautiful element,
which is that... all the milieux they present to us are perfectly determined states of things, both
historically and geographically, but they are at the same time presented as originary worlds.
And it is as originary worlds that the writer takes them at the beginning and lead them to their
end. These originary worlds will have an absolute beginning and a radical end. So much so…
[Someone enters] Good morning!
So much so that you have a kind of double layer: the action will take place in a historically
determined milieu, but at the same time, something of a completely different nature will
occur, something more profound, which will take place in the originary world that
corresponds to this determined milieu. And at each moment of the story, you will be able to
discover the originary world that corresponds to the derived milieu.
You see, naturalism is not at all – it seems to me – simply a description of certain milieux that
are determined as precisely as possible. The naturalists are, on the contrary, very great poets.
It is the elevation of historical milieux, of determined historical or geographical milieux... it is
the elevation of states of things to the form of an originary world that has its beginning and its
end… That's the first point.
Second point: it therefore follows that this originary or primordial world is as if, you
understand... They won't have any difficulty in explaining it to us, but this changes
everything. If you understood this first point, I would say, it won't be difficult to show us that,
whatever the world... whatever the milieu under consideration, it will have remained, literally,
the most "natural" possible. That is to say… the most natural in what sense? In the sense that
it is the world of bestial cruelty, of animal cruelty, or of primitive health, of the most delicate
soul, of the original soul, and that, in all the determined milieux of history and geography, you
only have to scratch the surface to find the originary world which will deliver up the most
incredible prehistoric animals, but which will no longer be prehistoric, or the most celestial
figures, but who will not be celestial. It's an odd operation, naturalism. So, I hope that you
have already encountered them...
So, to sum up this second point, you see I've just developed the main theme... the first
actualization… in the action-image, is not, if I try to follow a logical order, it does not take
place in the set milieu-situation-action. It occurs in this instauration, this exhibition of
supposedly primordial worlds, originary worlds. Second remark... What?
A student: [Inaudible remark, seeking to suggest a problem]
Deleuze: Not right away, not right away. We're coming to that… yes, I’m going to consider
it… Second point… okay, so what does it consist of, what does an originary world consist of?
What is it made of? What is the secondness in this case? What secondness will occur here?
What duels? As we saw, as they are not milieu-type situations, they are not yet milieusituations, they constitute originary worlds, primordial worlds. In the same way, these are not

                                                                                                  10

yet actions. Or, rather, beneath the most rigorous and precise action, you will discover
something. In the same way that in the most historically and geographically determined
environment, you discover the originary world, here, beneath the most rigorous and
implacable action, you will discover another secondness, an originary secondness. And what
will this originary secondness be?
It will be – and this is indeed a secondness – the coupling of what will found all action
according to naturalism, namely the coupling of the impulse and its object. Originary worlds
are made of impulses and objects of the impulse in the form of a secondness, since these
objects and impulses are separated. The impulse is the blind, obstinate search for its object, or
for something that will be its object, and the object is in search of its impulse… And this
could be the purest savagery. Why? Because object is a bad word. The impulse does not
choose an object. It tears, it cuts, it captures, it wrests its object. It doesn't wrest it out of
sadism; it wrests its object in order to constitute it… Why? Because it is well known, and it
isn't surprising that these authors will have been in some way influenced by psychoanalysis.
The object of the impulse7 is what psychoanalysis, thanks to Melanie Klein, began to refer to
as "the partial object". Now, the partial object... what is disappointing about the expression
partial object is that we have the impression that it is a type of object, but the partial object is
is not at all a type of object. It is an object that has been reduced to this state. Something had
to be torn away from the complete object. In other words, we have to find another word than
partial object. Since I haven't found one, let's say instead of object, "é-jet" or better "dé-jet"8,
implying the action of tearing away. It must be wrested from the state of things. The impulse
must triumph. In other words, the impulse never has a global object as its object; it must wrest
fragments from the state of things. For the real object of the impulse is the fragment.
And the original world is precisely the world where impulses and object-fragments, the
fragments that will serve as objects for the impulse, confront one another. And what might
these fragments be? As many as there are impulses. And what would the impulses be? As
many as there are fragments. Everything that is in fragments provokes an impulse, even if it is
an artificial one. We are beyond the difference between nature and artifice since, even in the
most artificial world, there is something original at stake. So that everything that is a fragment
is the object of an impulse, which could be what? Well, sexual impulses with fragments of
bodies; impulses of money with those ready-made fragments, coins and banknotes; impulses
of hunger, food impulses – excellent for fragments – and then maybe many others. And so,
you will have the originary world – here, the notion of originary world becomes clearer –
when the determined state of things, however historical it may be, however artificial, permits
this one and only story to emerge: the story of impulses and their objects.
So that at this level of the action-image, what will be the type of sign that will respond to an
originary world insofar as it develops into an impulse-object? What is the form, the sign of
this secondness? The sign of this secondness is what we will have to call the symptom, and
this cinema will be a cinema of symptoms. And after all, the directors who have risen to the
challenge of this cinema will have the right – if they wish – to say as Nietzsche did: "We the
physicians of civilization"… We physicians of civilization… This phrase that he applied to
philosophers and which a small number of great directors have the right to claim… "We are
physicians of civilization", meaning something very, very precise, namely that in the most
historically determined milieux, we diagnose the "originary world" that this historically
determined milieu, this state of things, contains.9 For we diagnose the impulses, the objects of
impulse, the nuptials between the impulses and the objects, as they unfold in this world.

                                                                                                         11

Third remark… Consequently, I would say, this originary world defined by the adventure of
impulses and their objects constitutes a radical origin, it is at once an absolute beginning, and
an absolute end. What interests these directors, therefore, is that this world... it's not the
intermediaries that interest them, this is precisely what interests the "realists", they are
interested in the intermediaries, in what occurs in the between, they have no interest in either
the beginning or the end… But they [the naturalists] are exclusively interested in the
beginning and the end because they are the same thing: it's in the same movement that this
world is hatched and is already finished. It's as if the naturalist idea is precisely to make all
worlds aborted worlds, because in their eyes, God has really succeeded only in creating
aborted worlds. We might suppose, in mythological terms, and such mythologies do exist, that
God, before creating the world, makes several botched attempts. He makes a lot of botched
attempts that don't work, so he throws them away before creating our world. They [the
naturalists] say: well, actually, no, we are still in the period of failures. We have all kinds of
originary worlds, all of them botched, so how can they be defined?
Time, the true time, is this identical nature of beginning and end. The only thing that counts
is the absolute beginning of the originary world, and consequently, also its absolute end, its
radical end. And why do they go towards a radical end? It's because these originary worlds
are closed systems, and they are abominably closed systems… We are locked in these
attempted worlds, these primordial worlds, or rather the characters are radically and forever
entrapped – Forever? Let's be careful, perhaps we are going too fast, but that's okay, we will
rectify things later. And why do they head towards their end? Because they follow the slope
of the impulses and their objects. And the originary world is nothing else than the common
slope of impulses and their objects.
And what is this common slope of impulses and their objects? Well, on the one hand, it is
death, and there arises the strangest death-drive as a summa of all impulses. Yes,
psychoanalysis has been there! But here it is much livelier, and they do not necessarily
depend on it. What is the slope of objects? It's where all the fragments come together to form
a kind of humus that is one with the humus of the beginning of the world and the humus of
the end of the world. It is the garbage dump, the universal rubbish tip. And when the impulse
is to root through the garbage, we will know that the originary world has come to an end, but
its end was there right from the beginning. [Interruption of the recording] [1:04:06]
Part 2
… Long live naturalism! What a marvel! And it's like the world of Empedocles when it is led
by discord: eyes without foreheads, hands without arms, all these partial objects that come
together, lapping around and forming a kind of swamp.10 See how this is no longer in any way
like Expressionism. I don't want to dwell on this point, but it's clearly nothing at all like
Expressionism. It's the world of impulses and their objects. It's no longer the world of
affects… Here I don't want to, I'm not going to elaborate...
So, there is this common slope that goes from the original world in its absolute beginning to
its radical end, with what is nonetheless... in fact it's too sad, it's all just too sad unless – it's
like entropy, the entropy of the originary world... ah yes, unless the closed world, the
originary world in its closure, in its slope, in its entropy, is somehow… open to the Open, or
else partially open, ajar... unless there is a rise in entropy or a negentropy. What would bring
about this rise in entropy? Is there a possible salvation? Well, God knows naturalists are far
from mystical! But they have never stopped posing the question of faith.

                                                                                                  12

Is there salvation? Not in any general sense, but considering that they are the ones who
invented this problem of the originary worlds, of the closed vessels in which they discovered
under the determined states of things... it's inevitable they would have to confront the problem
of “are we going to get out of this? And who will get us out of it? What faith? And they no
doubt oscillated between two responses: a faith of the type... no, between several responses.
Perhaps a religious type of faith, that is, all abdicated religions. To extract a faith from
religion, that was a possible answer. Or else, ah yes, perhaps love. But what kind of love
would it take to increase this entropy, to open up these closed worlds? Or even revolutionary
socialism. And after all, these were all directions Zola had already taken. How to get out of
these originary worlds, through love, socialism, an equivalent of faith? Is it possible?
Here is the table, in three moments… you see the table I wanted to make. Well, it would be
sufficient... You have already guessed, to my mind there are only two figures in cinema who
have managed to build from one end to the other this world of impulses and objects, and have
let us see the originary worlds that lie under determined states of things: Obviously I'm
referring to Stroheim11 and Buñuel12, and this would be the action cinema of Stroheim and
Buñuel... Yes?
A student: [Inaudible question]
Deleuze: We are going to look at that, because I would like to... yes, we'll look at that, as the
question is extremely pertinent. We'll address it through these two directors... In this respect, I
will try to show... I'm not going to try and apply this theory to Stroheim and Buñuel, but on
the contrary, I will try to show how everything I've been talking about came directly from the
cinema of Stroheim and Buñuel. In other words, I could almost say that this is a cinema
before action, not action cinema. It's not realism, it's naturalism. And this is very, very
different. It's this world of impulses and their objects. And filming impulses and [their
objects]... to my knowledge, American cinema, despite its many powers – and here I'm not
saying... remember my rule of thumb, I'm not saying it's better – American cinema has never
understood anything about this problem13. To the point that neither Stroheim nor Buñuel
could be integrated into American cinema, even when they were in Hollywood, or when they
went there.
The real genius of American cinema, it seems to me, simplifying a lot, was in action cinema.
But what was happening at the level of… They don't believe in the idea of originary worlds,
necessarily. The idea of originary worlds is such a European idea, to discover originary
worlds under, under determined states of things, is not an idea an American could have, it's an
idea of an old German or Spanish guy who's a little bit twisted. Yes, it's an idea… well, it's
very bizarre. But as far as I know, they are the only ones who have grasped this.
A woman student: And what about Ferreri14, where would you group him?
Deleuze: Who?
The student: Ferreri.
Deleuze: Ferreri… Ah yes, Ferreri, that's another case! Perhaps Ferreri would belong to this
lineage. Yes, perhaps it would be interesting to look at Ferreri from this angle. Yes, there are
films… I can see immediately which ones you're thinking of... Ah yes, it's not a bad idea.
Perhaps, but did he... have the genius of the other two? Yes, perhaps Ferreri could very well
fit into this... Well, I have to run to the secretary's office. Don't disappear... You too? Oh, what

                                                                                                   13

a coincidence! But, me first, because I'm in a hurry... [Pause; interruption of the recording]
[1:10:40]
Deleuze: [Deleuze speaks to someone near him softly, then to the class] Fine, so can you
please close the door... if you don't mind, if you don't mind could you close the door? [Pause]
Are you ready? [Pause] So? [Pause] Well … That door annoys me… [Pause] I hate doors.
[Pause]
So, well... I would like to say very quickly what this "naturalism" really consists of. If you've
understood me, I don't see any... Everyone knows that with Buñuel, for example, the question
of his "Surrealism" is a very difficult one to pose. I want to say something very, very simple
in this regard: the misunderstanding of Buñuel's relationship to Surrealism can be explained
quite easily. It is that... I mean, what is really surreal for Buñuel? It is precisely the discovery
and construction of these originary worlds. And this had little to do with Breton. Breton was
not mistaken regarding the oddness of his relation to Buñuel – he felt quite rightly that Buñuel
was not one of them. Literally speaking, the first form of Surrealism is precisely naturalism, if
we define naturalism by this construction and discovery of the originary worlds interior to
historical-geographical states of things. So... Crap! Crap! Crap! [Pause] Would you shut the
door? I feel very Buñuelesque… The door must be closed, it's the enemy! I don't see what
form of salvation can come from outside, it can only bring calamities.
I take... now that I've attempted to develop the general schema, I just want to try to... I just
want to add a few things... First of all, I'll start with a question: what do you find that
Stroheim and Buñuel have in common, especially in their way of filming? You have a first
quite fundamental theme, which is that of closed worlds. Even when they are open to nature –
they can also be exteriors. But the great enclosures, even of exterior landscapes, in the films
of both, are great moments. Stroheim's mountains have huge significance, while Buñuel's
exteriors are filmed in such a way that they in fact constitute isolated spaces. Here we have a
first... these closed worlds that are in fact originary worlds, that is, places where the history of
impulses and their objects will be unleashed.
Second point: all actions are related, indeed, this is the first form of violence in cinema. In our
analysis of the action-image, we will see... we will encounter all forms of violence. But this
first violence is naturalistic violence, meaning first in the logical sense of where we are in our
analysis. It is the violence of impulses and their objects, of these torn away objects and of
these impulses that tear away. It is the world of predators. I tear away, and that's it, the actions
are only there "for something", which is the originary action, that is, the act of the impulse.
These are not actions, there are no actions in this kind of cinema. They are impulsive acts,
which, if necessary, imply the greatest cunning. Cunning… Yes, that is part of the impulse
and so on. But it is not yet the action-image the way American cinema intends it.
So, this is what I'm saying... then you have the double slope of degradation, where the
impulse and the object plunge towards what? Towards what is in fact the end of the world, the
end of the world that unites both of them in the same image, for example, the famous image
from Foolish Wives…15 the corpse dumped, the corpse dumped in the rubbish tip, that is to
say the common end of the impulse and the object. And the no less famous image at the end
of The Young and the Damned…16 the corpse of the kid thrown onto the rubbish tip. And, in
both cases, the affirmation that it is always a question of an originary world. In Stroheim's
case, it could be the princedom of an operetta, it could be an operetta like The Merry Widow.17
It could be anything, it could be the casino in Foolish Wives and so on. This closed world is

                                                                                                      14

discovered and posited as the originary world, the world of origins, that is, the world that is
defined as a symptom by its impulses and by its objects, and by the objects that are torn away.
So, in both cases, we have a completely new type of close-up. This time and only this time,
the close-up is indeed on the partial object. In both cases, you have shoes as objects of a
sexual impulse, or a missing leg, infirmity. But you see I'm not going back on what I said
when I was talking about the affection-image: that the close-up never constitutes a thing as a
partial object. It operates in a completely different way. Here indeed I find another type of
close-up, but I don't have to correct myself, because it is not the close-up that constitutes the
thing as a partial object. It is precisely because the thing is in itself a partial object insofar as it
constitutes the object of the impulse that it consequently becomes a matter for a close-up.
Hence the close-ups of shoes, hence the close-ups of missing legs, hence the close-ups of
infirmities and so on.
The common slope is, in the end, the way in which the impulse seizes... an originary world is
something you can easily extract from a milieu. It traverses several milieux. It is even one of
the differences there is to what we will see later constitutes the milieu. It includes different
milieux, but how is it oriented? It has two coordinates. It is oriented... an originary world is
already oriented in its distribution of impulses between rich-poor, through the classes that are
a derived notion. But the brutality of rich and poor and of good and evil... rich-poor, goodevil, is what will frame the world of impulses and their objects… Both in Buñuel and in
Stroheim, you have the way in which the food impulse, hunger, is quintessentially filmed, but
especially in Buñuel, it goes without saying. So, you have all that.
But I would just like to begin considering if there is a distinction here... In a sense, the
parallels and correspondences between the two directors seem to me so evident, that we can
speak of a common naturalism. But at the same time, we can all sense that these two directors
are extraordinarily different. I could also say that what they have in common... you know how
Stroheim, in a pathetic way, when could no longer make films, he was dying from no longer
being able to make films, so he wrote cine-novels, and these novels were screenplays of what
he would have liked to make. These screenplays make terrible novels. If you want to
understand how different they are from real novels… they're very bad as novels, but as
screenplays they are sublime. He wrote a lot in this vein, these pure screenplays which are
admirable.
There is one in particular, Poto-Poto18, which is very unusual. One gets an idea of how
Stroheim's film of it would have turned out. Poto-Poto, spelled p-o-t-o-p-o-t-o… is his great
African film. Now you may know that one of Stroheim's films, Queen Kelly,19 included...
although it was interrupted, and he didn't… he wasn’t able to finish it the way he wanted…
but it included an African episode. Kelly, the heroine Kelly, was going to Africa where
abominable things were going to happen. And Poto-Poto is the continuation, it's the great
African film where there is a... where the young woman, where the young woman sells
herself, she sells her body, but in a very odd way: through a game of roulette. It's the world of
the rich. She sells her body at the roulette table, that is, there are men who place bets, and the
one who places the biggest bet gets the right to play roulette with her. This is a typical
Stroheim scene. You can imagine what he would have done with it in the movie.
So, there is a kind of brute who's an alcoholic, a local colonialist, who places a big bet and so
earns the right to play roulette with her. And then it's either she wins, and she takes all the
money of the bet, or she loses and she gives herself to him. Of course, she loses. And he will
take her to a putrid swamp where he has installed his system of exploitation and enslavement.

                                                                                                   15

He is a tyrant... he's a tyrant. And at this point, and here it gets more and more pure Stroheim.
As soon as she arrives, she is thrown into the swamp of Poto-Poto, and he cries out: "Now
you have been baptized, you have been made an honorary citizen of Poto-Poto, the cesspool
of the world, on the equator. Who was it that said… just a minute, it was something like…
“One degree of latitude or longitude more or less changes the whole code of morals and
jurisprudence?”20 It must have been some kind of Montaigne or Pascal who said that, that one
degree of latitude or longitude more or less entirely changes the code of morals and
jurisprudence. In terms of cinema this I would say is the cinema of action-milieux. But in the
cinema of object-impulses, it is not that. That is not the law.
Well, here, you see, here that's not the way things stand. It isn't one degree of latitude or
longitude more or less that changes, because here the latitude is zero. This is the originary
world. The latitude is zero! We, from Poto-Poto, have no laws, no morals, no worldly
etiquette. Here there are no traditions, no precedents. Here everyone acts according to the
impulse of the moment and does what Poto-Poto pushes him to do. Poto Poto is our only law,
our all-powerful leader, king, emperor, mogul, supreme judge. He is merciless, he accepts no
extenuating circumstances."21 Well, imagine all that in cinema! Amazing! So, this is latitude
zero, this is the originary world. There you have it.
So, you've got all this. And yet you feel that despite everything, this comparison is highly
formal... later I'll come back to a case that someone just mentioned because to me it seems
quite fascinating. Wouldn't this be something quite close to the very unusual practice we see
in Ferreri's recent cinema? Wouldn't he be the one who has understood something of this very
intriguing, very violent cinema? Because this is the first great cinematographic violence. It is
the first world of violence.
But I would just like to point out the differences. What is it in this community of styles, this
common naturalism… that makes Stroheim's naturalism different from Buñuel's? It is not the
same thing. It's not the same world. I would say, and I insisted on this, I began with Zola, by
saying: Yes, you understand, Zola's work, we know, is naturalism. But the history of the
naturalist movement, if I push my comparison a little, seems very interesting to me because
there was a disciple of Zola's called Huysmans…22 and with Huysmans, something happened.
He wrote a kind of manifesto saying: well, as for Zola, I'm fed up with him because he's too
limited, too parochial. But what are the concerns of Zola's naturalism? Well yes, it exhausts,
as I just said it exhausts everything in each book, but why? On account of the most material,
the most animal impulses. So yes, a book or a film on sexuality, a film on avarice, a film on
hunger or on food And yet, he says that this doesn't go far, it doesn't go far enough.
He says that what it would be necessary to discover – and it's at this moment that Huysmans
develops a very strange project – he says: but finally, we have to understand that there is a
naturalism of the soul. There is not only a naturalism of the body, there is a naturalism of the
soul. Furthermore, there is a naturalism of the most artificial. There is a naturalism of the
most artificial. It is necessary to go even further, he adds, there is a naturalism of the spiritual,
but to understand that, he says, one would have to have faith, and I do not yet have it.
Fortunately, he will soon have it. Yes, that's all he says. He says: I'm fed up, there are not only
social documents, or psychological documents. There are documents of souls. And he claims
to renew naturalism by this kind of move: to make a naturalism of the soul, either under the
form of artificial lives… He says: yes, naturalist heroes, finally, are not so celebrated because
they're reduced to what? They're reduced either to the brute beast, to man dominated by his
most material impulses, or to the average man, who slides into realism. The human beast or

                                                                                                16

the average individual. So he says, well, I'm going to make you a... [Interruption of the
recording] [90:00]
... including the field of artificial lives. And then he recounts how Des Esseintes,23 who
suffers from all kinds of illnesses and who is neurotic to the end, organizes a life of pure
artifice for himself. Right. And, in the course of the book, the ever-returning theme is that,
finally, artifice is still disappointing, because there is something even more beautiful than
artifice: the supernatural. And the supernatural is something that only faith can give us. You
see this shift from the perverse... from the man of perversion to the man of faith, all of which
is going to constitute a very strange new naturalism, where we can almost say that naturalism
and supernaturalism are no longer distinguishable.
I would almost say that between Stroheim... obviously I'm oversimplifying here, but between
Stroheim and Buñuel, there is something similar to this difference you have between Zola and
Huysmans. Because what is the major difference here? It seems to me that the big difference
is this: Buñuel, I would say – you can refine this for yourselves, but I want to go quickly –
Buñuel does not cease to question the possibility of the existence of impulses of good, or
impulses of faith, faith as an impulse. Well, from there on, the problem is twofold, faith or
good as an impulse.
The first response Buñuel gives is not a return to Zola’s naturalism, he adds another element.
The element has changed. Buñuel's first answer is: Well, yes, there are impulses of faith, and
even more so there are impulses towards the Good. Only they are no better than the others,
they are just as disgusting as the others. This is the theme of Buñuel's relationship with
Catholicism, and it's very odd. But I think that at least we are a bit more equipped now to try
to understand. But of course, there are saints. But of course, sanctity exists. But you know,
none of that is worth very much. It's as bestial as the beast, a partial-object impulse. In
Nazarín24, remember what is said to the priest? "You and I" – and this is obviously the voice
of the devil – "You and I are the same. The only difference is that you are on the side of Good
and I am on the side of Evil, and that's why both of us are useless.” This too is a kind of key
sentence. "Both of us are useless." If you remember Viridiana25, the man of Good, or the man
of faith, is radically useless. It's a closed universe no less than any other.
More than that, it's part… it's part of the closed originary world. You will have the men of
Good, you will have the men of Evil, you will have the poor, you will have the rich… the two
do not correspond. You'll have these four categories, but the radical uselessness of it all, the
Good as well as the Evil. This very uselessness lies in the parasites. The inhabitants of this
originary world are all parasites, whether poor, rich, men of Good, men of Evil, they are all
parasites, they are predators. Okay. So all these themes were also present in Stroheim's work,
but it's in Buñuel's cinema that this will become the fundamental theme.
And what about the second level? And yet... and yet, isn't there a form of salvation, what I
call the rise in entropy? In Stroheim... there are some very odd statements Stroheim makes,
where he pretends to be a pure Christian. But of course, he was so fond, he was so fond of
making statements designed to shock. He says, oh, but Christianity is very important,
Christianity runs through all my work. It doesn't seem obvious to me. But with Buñuel, it's
obvious. So there's something like a small step... And indeed, it's very much related to that
question: is there salvation? From these closed originary worlds, can we climb back up the
slope of the impulse and its object?

                                                                                                    17

In the case of Stroheim, I leave the question completely open because, as I said, his work was
too soon interrupted. I would just point out that in the screenplay projects, when he had to
interrupt... his own endings were most often cut. For example, Queen Kelly, at least as it is
taken up by the Poto-Poto screenplay, is a story of pure love where, in the end, the two heroes
emerge from the swamp – though in what condition – where they were tied to one another as
the waters rose and the crocodiles gathered. That would have made for images of the swamp...
for Stroheim the swamp wouldn't at all have been an expressionist swamp, it would have been
an extremely odd naturalistic swamp. Kind of like the "rubbish tip” because this is what
fascinates him: the dump, the dump and the corpse. Right.
But, in fact, the two lovers who are tied to one another as the crocodiles gather and the waters
rise makes for an amazing image! They are saved in time, and it is love that saves them.
Right. There's the famous scene in Stroheim of the rise in entropy, the scene of the apple trees
in bloom and pure love in… The Wedding March, I think... yes, it's in The Wedding March.26
But let's leave it... let's leave it open. We don't know, we don't know what Stroheim would
have done.
What I am saying is that in Buñuel's case you have a precise order. An indication that, by
some means... by some means perhaps, perhaps... in his case, it always turns around two
poles, the revolution or love. To transform the world, change life, all those famous things, I
don't need to elaborate any further... It seems to me that what I need, what I need to develop,
is novelty. The Stroheim formula, after all, is relatively well known, not his way of filming,
but degradation with a capital D, the question of whether we can rise from this Degradation?
It's known. What is amazing is the way he films this Degradation.
When people say he is a filmmaker of time – we'll see later, since I hope that, after the
holidays, we'll get to the problem of the time-image in cinema – I would say it's both true and
false, it's true and it's false. It's true as they say in all the histories of cinema that he was the
first to really introduce the element of duration into cinema, but they always say that about
Greed.27 I believe that he is a filmmaker of time, but where the question of time cannot
intervene as such. So it's not quite true; he's not a filmmaker of time strictly speaking. There
aren't many filmmakers of time, because it is a difficult question, but there is a very simple
reason why the problem of time cannot really be the object of Stroheim's cinema. It is
precisely that time is subordinated to the slope of impulses and their objects. And time can
only intervene in function of this major theme of Stroheim's cinema. It cannot come to the
fore, it cannot be treated directly as such. It can only be treated as a function of the impulses.
Whereas take another guy, who completely missed this question of impulses. He would have
liked to, but he was too elegant, he was too elegant, too aristocratic. And for him, it's just the
opposite. While his problem is time, he was never able to reach the problem of impulses,
however hard he tried. This is Visconti, it's Visconti. He wouldn't get to the cinema of... He
was much too aristocratic to get to that world of violence.28 But it doesn't matter…
I would say that in Buñuel there is something... there is an absolutely new formula that, it
seems to me, could be summed up as follows: we no longer find ourselves confronted with
degradation or with the eventual ascent of the slope, which would in some way constitute the
terms of Stroheim's cinema. Because Buñuel discovered something that cinematographically
belongs only to him. It is that for him... well, what is degradation? He turns around
something… for him degradation – and we'll see what he means by this – is repetition. It's
repetition. He was undoubtedly the first to make of repetition a cinematographic power. It's
repetition, but why? Because everything deteriorates through repetition. Repetition is both

                                                                                                       18

life and the degradation of life. Always getting up, always going to bed, every day being fed,
how do you imagine all this could go well?
As Comtesse said earlier, or rather as Lacan said: if there was no death, how could you live?
You wouldn't be able to bear life. But if it had to go on like that, then repetition is the very
essence of degradation. What will happen in Buñuel's closed universe is this process of
repetition. This is what happens in the originary world. The originary world is given over to a
process of self-repetition that is at one with its own degradation.
But is this true? And what could save us from repetition? The answer is simple, and after all,
it has been given, here, and it will allow us to come back to philosophy. What can save us
from repetition? Nothing, except repetition. Ah, so... there are two types of repetition. Surely,
there must be a thousand! But among others, there are two. And there would be: the repetition
that saves, and then there is the repetition that does what? That kills. There is the repetition
that is at one with degradation, and there is the repetition that saves from degradation, and that
raises back up the slope of degradation. So, who was it that said this?
Well, we have so many... I can think of a first author who said it in the "burlesque" mode, or
else I don't know, burlesque is not the right word... an author that the Surrealists knew very
well, and it doesn't seem to me entirely out of the question that Buñuel also knew him,
although, as far as I know, he makes no reference to this author – it's... don't think that I'm
trying to drag things out, but as always, I've got a hole in… what is the name of the author of
Impressions of Africa?29
Students: Roussel!
Yes, it's Roussel, an author the Surrealists were very fond of. And Roussel recounted strange
stories like this one… If you listen carefully to the story, you'll see right away that it's like
Buñuel. Seven corpses – I think it's seven, but it doesn't matter – a few corpses, each one
locked in a glass case, are condemned to repeat, to repeat a fundamental event in their lives.30
So, each of them repeats… And there's one great scholar, a cadaver in his window, who never
stops repeating the fundamental event of his life, namely the death of his daughter by murder.
The hell of repetition is a well-known theme, you have Strindberg too…31 Stroheim will also
be sensitive to this, but you can see this is where Buñuel takes off. And then this great scholar,
a corpse who never stops repeating the murder of his daughter in a kind of absolute
somnambulism, a bad repetition, invents what for his time would be an incredible instrument.
Nowadays, Roussel, who was always ahead of his time, would invent something else. Here he
invents a synthesizer, where he borrows the voice of a singer. He tweaks this voice so much
that he ends up reconstituting the most natural, most authentic voice of his daughter. And it is
when he has found, thanks to the magic synthesizer, the pure voice of his daughter that he is
delivered from the bad repetition. And in a way, in a way his daughter is returned to him. He
is healed. He comes back from the dead. A lovely story, a really lovely story.
Roussel's writing abounds – this is just one example among thousands – he abounds in these
devices, which consist, namely, in opposing two repetitions, the repetition that enchains and
the repetition that liberates, the repetition that saves. And he distributes them. But you sense
that this is not what is at stake here. In fact, he distributes them – the artist has every right to
do so – such that he can recognize himself in them. There is the imperfect repetition, and the
absolutely perfect repetition. Yet one senses that it something else is at stake. It is not the
perfection of the repetition as repetition that is saving. But it's a way of speaking, a symbolic
way of expressing the two repetitions to say that one contains small inaccuracies, while the

                                                                                                  19

other is perfect and absolutely accurate. Again we can all sense that something else is at stake
in these two repetitions.
Another author, who I don't know if Buñuel knew or not, and who has been very important
for philosophy, is Kierkegaard. And the great Kierkegaard wrote a book called Repetition…32
And in this book, Repetition – I don't think Roussel knew it – in this book, Repetition, he
develops the following idea: there is a bad repetition, a demonic repetition that kills, and this
he calls aesthetic repetition, and it is a repetition that enchains us. It can be the repetition of
habit, or it can be even worse: it's the repetition of Dom Juan.33 It is the aesthetic repetition of
one who seeks to relive the past. It is repetition turned towards the past. "I want to reconstitute
the moment when I was happy". Or "I want my fiancée back. But who can give her back to
me? Hasn't she grown old and so have I?" You see, this search through time, trying to
resurrect the past.
And then... and then, in the end they might think they're artists, but this is the bourgeois
repetition, it is a bourgeois repetition. Yet in this world, this bourgeois world, there are
strange men who appear that you don't recognize at first. They look like everyone else. Only,
their real name is Job. Or Solomon. Or Kierkegaard himself, who was crying over a lost
girlfriend, who was always crying over lost girlfriends... and who was faced with this problem
of how to escape from repetition. And he discovered this: what is the operation of faith? The
operation of faith consists in this, and here we're talking about a faith devoid of religion. What
is the peak of faith when it no longer depends, when it breaks through the religious ceiling?
That I renounce everything. Not so that... – and in the same operation that Kierkegaard calls a
leap, everything will be returned to me. Let me renounce everything and everything will be
returned to me. Even more, tenfold... I must renounce my fiancée so that what? So that my
fiancée be returned to me, but under what kind of form? In the form of absolute fidelity. Oh
sure, she will not be returned to me in flesh and blood. How could it be possible? Besides, she
married someone else, this was Kierkegaard's case, she married someone else. She will be
returned to me "better" than in flesh and blood. She will be returned to me in the absolute
fidelity that I would have for her. It is at the same moment that I renounce her that I obtain the
true repetition, the repetition that saves. Okay. Now we understand better. The symbolism
was: inexact, imperfect repetition vs. perfect and exact repetition, but more profoundly, it
would be aesthetic repetition vs. repetition of faith, repetition through faith. And that's what it
is.
In Buñuel's case, what works cinematographically isn’t, in a sense it is much less... because in
terms of capturing the movement of degradation, and the little upward movements, the little
upward movements of entropy, it's really Stroheim who knows how to do this, he's really on
the side of Zola, I think, he's a kind of immense cinematographic Zola. But what Buñuel puts
the camera at the service of is the process of repetition and the possibility of a repetition that
saves, that is to say, that opens up, that opens up the closed originary world. And how does he
show this?
We can all think, for example, those who know a little Buñuel, of two fundamental cases:
first, The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie…34 Well, here we have the very type of
repetition that enchains. And indeed, in the repetition that enchains, if you like, one must
repeat, but why? What is the law of a repetition that enchains? In the end, Roussel had already
stated it. That's why we can't exclude an influence through artistic forms, from Roussel to
Buñuel. Namely, the event is undone even before it happens; the event undoes itself even
before it happens. We can't make it. And The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie is the story
of eight failed lunches that don't manage to take place, that is, that they unravel before they

                                                                                                   20

can happen. It is the repetition that enchains, and each time for a different reason, a different
motivation. But it is this repetitive series of eight terms that will constitute the structure of The
Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie.
But the most famous film in this respect is The Exterminating Angel.35 And The
Exterminating Angel, if I summarize it very quickly, before ending, is: people, some
bourgeois people – the theme of repetition is again linked to the bourgeoisie – these bourgeois
find themselves gathered in a room, where they are have assembled for a social occasion. And
the same scenes… from the beginning the same scenes are filmed several times with
variations. Robbe-Grillet36 took up this method again, but I think in a completely different
context from this problem of impulses and their objects. So, I would say we should avoid
purely formal comparisons since the questions involved in Robbe-Grillet's cinema are so
different. For him, it's more a problem of time, not of impulses and objects; it's a problem of
fantasy, but all this is very different.
But... I just want to give you an example, two people, at the beginning of The Exterminating
Angel, two people are introduced to one another. One time, this is filmed in such a way that
they immediately turn away, it's as if they don't know each other, as if they didn't much like
each other, and the second time they're filmed as if they were old friends who are reuniting.
And in my memory, there is even a third time when they are filmed yet again.37 Similarly, the
master of the house, once, gives a toast to general indifference with everyone talking; a
second time he gives a toast where everyone is attentive. And all the time, this is how it is.
You have this kind of repetition that repeats through inexactitude. And then... you know
what's going to happen: without knowing why they will find themselves unable to leave the
room. They will be condemned to a kind of repetition. It's the closed originary world, the
closed originary world and yet there are no barriers, no one forces them. There is an impulse,
there is an impulse that roots them to this originary world. It is enough that the originary
world, corresponding to the state of things, is unleashed for them to be unable to leave it from
that point on. There is an impulse by which they root themselves to it.
Each time they will play out their story with the dead bodies, each time with the dead man's
hand in that of the exterminating angel, this kind of obsessive repetition and so on… and then
there is a strange young woman, the Valkyrie, who has a very odd role and who appears to be
the daughter of God. It is she who has determined the initial confinement, that is, the bad
repetition, at the moment when she threw a lighter through the window, which was like the
beginning of the originary world. It was the signal for the development of the originary world
to begin. And then she gives herself or doesn't give herself to the master of the house, who
seems to be God the father, while she herself is the daughter of God, among other things.
Well, we don't know very well because it seems that at the same time this God-the-father is
impotent, well, that's the least of it, since it's all about impulses. So, you have all this. So.
And then suddenly they are liberated. The closed world has opened up. It has been opened by
a special kind of repetition, which is the relationship of the Valkyrie with the householder.
And here you absolutely have the Kierkegaardian theme or the theme of Raymond Roussel,
that of the repetition that saves. Except that it saves and yet it doesn't save. Then, all content,
they gather in a cathedral, along with many more people, to sing a Te Deum in praise of the
repetition that saves. Too bad! They have confused faith with religion. They have confused
faith and religion. This Te Deum is a disaster because they have all ended up in the cathedral,
more numerous than the first time, and they can't get out. It will start again. That is to say, the
bad repetition has resurfaced in the cathedral while outside we hear the rumble of social

                                                                                                  21

unrest and revolution. So the saving repetition has failed, but there is this other possibility that
the world can be opened up through revolution, and so on.38
Finally, in a very great Buñuel film, The Milky Way…39 you can find all his themes. Of
course, there are impulses of faith, there is everything you can imagine. Only once again, first
of all, the impulses of faith are as disgusting as the impulses of pure matter or pure bestiality,
and on the other hand, even if they aren't, all they do is do create useless people and parasites.
The thirty or so characters of The Milky Way – which is, I think, one of Buñuel's greatest. And
on the other hand, ah yes, the character of Christ, isn't he the repetition that saves? And there,
the commentators of The Milky Way... here I refer you to a book that is quite good in this
respect, Maurice Drouzy's book, Luis Buñuel, Architecte du Rêve.40
Maurice Drouzy makes an excellent commentary on The Milky Way, showing how
technically, each time there is a bad repetition, it is actually the camera, that either in the
interiors, or in the exteriors, constitutes the world as a closed space, as a closed space even
outside where it creates prisons with columns through some extremely clever pieces of set
design or movements of the dolly.
And on the contrary, in the passages of Christ, where we never see the sky, notably, even in
the exteriors, and on the contrary, in the passages of Christ, there, on the contrary, it is the
open world, the possibility of a repetition that saves, but in what form? It is a Christ who is as
much an embodiment of faith without religion as of revolution... without what? That's what
the surreal is for him, that's what the surreal is. It's not something opposed to the real, it's
something that happens in the originary world that corresponds to the real world, or to the real
milieu. It is by passing through the originary world that we will know if we are definitively
condemned, or if the closed world can be opened, and opened by what? Only here, at the end,
we have Buñuel's doubt, as Drouzy shows very well, when at the end you have the only
occasion, in these final images, that Christ himself is filmed in a closed world, as if he had
opened up to us the possibility of a repetition that saves, but then he reminds us that we must
not go so fast in this direction… and bang! Here we have a Christ who returns to his originary
world where he is like the others, a parasite.
So you see what happens in the end? I would like that next time – indeed, your remark
interests me more and more – if you can possibly follow me in this description of the first
level of the action-image, namely, the originary world as a form of secondness referring to the
secondness of the object-impulse and that whole adventure... Indeed, when I say that it
happens twice in the history of cinema, and you said that maybe the same question is at stake
in Ferreri's cinema, especially in one film that you mentioned, an early film of Ferreri's where
there are two guys who never stop blowing up a balloon… that would be very interesting. Do
you know this film? What is the name of the film?
A student: Break Up!41
Deleuze: Ah yes, Break Up, great… Amazing! So, I feel... for next time, we'll see… for next
time I would ask that especially those of you who know something about Ferreri's cinema…
could talk about Ferreri. And there you can see exactly where we've got to. We will be
moving on to the second level of the action-image… That's it. [End of the session] [2:03:12]
Notes

                                                                                                                                                   22

1 Marnie (1964) is a film by Alfred Hitchcock (starring Tippi Hedren and Sean Connery) about a young kleptomaniac woman who becomes
involved with a rich publisher for whom she goes to work and from whom she begins to steal. After abusing her trust by raping her, he tries
to help Marnie root out the childhood trauma that haunts her, which is signalled by flashes of red that assail the young woman when she sees
some red object.
2 Here, as in Cinema 1: The Movement-image, Deleuze sometimes refers to Peirce's term sinsign and sometimes modifies it to synsign.
3 William Claude Dukenfield (1880 – 1946), better known as W. C. Fields, was an American comedian, actor, juggler, and writer. Fields'
career began in vaudeville and although mainly a stage comedian, he began appearing in films in 1915, several directed by comic impresario
Mack Sennet and one by D.W. Griffith.
4 The film in question, as Deleuze reports in Cinema 1: The Movement-image, is The Fatal Glass of Beer (1933) written by Fields and
directed by Clyde Bruckman. See Cinema 1, p. 154.
5 Emile Zola (1840-1902) was a French novelist, journalist, playwright, the best-known practitioner of the literary school of naturalism, and
an important contributor to the development of theatrical naturalism. Among his most well known novels are Thérèse Raquin, Germinal,
Nana, L'argent and Pot Bouille.
6 Honoré de Balzac (1799-1850), French literary artist who wrote a vast number of novels and short stories collectively called La Comédie
humaine (The Human Comedy) in order to present a broad panorama of French society, meticulously describing the urban working classes
and provincial life. Owing to his sharp observation of detail and unfiltered representation of society, Balzac is considered one of the founders
of Realism in European literature.
7 In line with the translators of Cinema 1: The Movement-image, we translate the French 'pulsion' with 'impulse', though for some later
commentators this remains a controversial choice. While the more familiar term 'drive' relates more closely to the psychoanalytic
underpinnings of Deleuze's discussion of the impulse-image, it is clear that from a cinematic perspective 'impulse' is the more appropriate
term since it is the impulse (as an observable 'embryonic' behaviour) and not the drive (its supposed explanation) which the image renders
visible.
8 Trying to distance himself from the psychoanalytic concept of the 'partial object', here Deleuze attempts to hack the etymology of 'object'
itself: ob (in the way) - ject (thrown), appealing to the sense of é as an 'un' prefix, therefore suggesting an undoing or a displacing of the
object from itself, or dé referring to 'off' or 'from', therefore reinforcing the notion of something torn away from the object. Nonetheless, in
Cinema 1: The Movement-image, he will choose not to pursue this line of linguistic deconstruction.
9 Deleuze would return to the Nietzschean idea of the "physician of civilization" in greater depth in Essays Critical and Clinical (Critique et
Clinique) though – as Ronald Bogue points out in a note to his survey Deleuze and Literature – the term physician of civilization does not
occur in the works Nietzsche published under his own supervision. In a letter to Rohde, March 22, 1873, Nietzsche referred to a projected
book on Greek philosophy as Der Philosoph als Artzt der Kultur (The Philosopher as Cultural Physician), and under this title the editors of
the 1901–1913 Nietzsches Werke published a brief selection from Nietzsche’s 1873 notebooks.
10 See for example Fragment 57: Strange creatures of olden times – "There budded many a head without a neck / And arms were roaming,
shoulderless and bare / And eyes that wanted foreheads drifted by" – in The Fragments of Empedocles (trans. William Elllery Leonard)
Chicago: Open Court Press, 1908, p.36.
11 Erich von Stroheim (1885-1957) was an Austrian-American director, actor and producer best known for his uncompromising style and
fastidious attention to detail. After working as an actor and assistant to D.W. Griffith in The Birth of a Nation (1915) and Intolerance (1916),
his first film as a director Blind Husbands (1919), followed by The Devil’s Passkey (1920, now lost) and Foolish Wives (1922). Stroheim's
most famous film is Greed (1924), considered one of the masterpieces of silent cinema but whose original 9-hour runtime was eventually
edited against his wishes to a 140-minute version. Following The Merry Widow (1925), The Wedding March (1928) and Queen Kelly (1928),
all of which suffered from studio interference, Stroheim's career as a director was effectively ended. He returned to Europe as an actor,
appearing in Jean Renoir’s La Grande Illusion (1937), and to Hollywood for a role in Billy Wilder’s Sunset Boulevard (1950), for which he
was nominated for an Academy Award.
12 Luis Buñuel (1900-1983) was a Spanish filmmaker initially connected to the Surrealist movement. An atheist and communist
sympathizer, he won early fame with avant-garde experiments in France and then pursued a career in Mexico before earning international
acclaim with the later films he directed in Spain and France. Among his most famous works are the short film Un chien andalou (An
Andalusian Dog) in collaboration with Salvador Dalí, L'Age d'Or (1930), Los Olvidados (1950), Susana (1951), The Exterminating Angel
(1962), Diary of a Chambermaid (1964), Belle de jour (1967), The Milky Way (1969), Tristana (1970), The Discreet Charm of the
Bourgeoisie (1972), The Phantom of Liberty (1974) and That Obscure Object of Desire (1977).

                                                                                                                                                    23

13 Deleuze returns to the question of American cinema’s problem with naturalism in Cinema 1, where he finds evidence of a naturalist
approach in the cinema of King Vidor, notably in the two films he made with Jennifer Jones, Duel in the Sun (1946) and Ruby Gentry (1952).
See Cinema 1, p. 134.
14 Marco Ferreri (1928–1997) was an Italian director, screenwriter and actor who began his career in the 1950s. Acclaimed for his
provocative, visionary style and surreal humour, among his most known films are The Ape Woman (1964), The Seed of Man (1969),
Dillinger Is Dead (1969), La Grande Bouffe (1973), Touche pas à la femme blanche (1974), Bye Bye Monkey (1978), Tales of Ordinary
Madness (1981) and The Future is Woman (1984).
15 Foolish Wives (1922), Stroheim's second major film is a silent erotic drama about a bogus Count (played by Stroheim himself) who uses
the status of his forged identity to seduce and exploit rich women. Like many of Von Stroheim's films, it was drastically cut on release.
16 The Young and the Damned (Orig. Los Olvidados, 1950), also known as The Forgotten Ones, is a teen crime drama directed by Luis
Buñuel about a group of destitute children and their misfortunes in a Mexico City slum.
17 The Merry Widow (1925) is a romantic comedy drama written and directed by Stroheim adapted from the operetta by Franz Lehar about a
prince who falls in love with a poor dancing girl whom he is forbidden to marry and who ends up in the hands of a lecherous old man. When
the man dies he has to try to woo her all over again.
18 Poto-poto was one of two cine-novels Stroheim wrote in the 1930s (the other being Paprika). Set in the same location as the heavily
censored and re-edited African section of Queen Kelly, which his star Gloria Swanson and the studios considered scandalously unseemly.
See Erich Von Stroheim, Poto-Poto (trans. Renée Nitschke) Pygmalion Books, 1991. See also Deleuze's discussion of Poto-poto in Cinema
1: The Movement-image, p.126.
19 Queen Kelly is an American silent film directed by Erich von Stroheim. The film was produced in 1928–29 and released by United
Artists. It starred Gloria Swanson, in the title role, Walter Byron as her lover, and Seena Owen.
20 Here Deleuze is no doubt referring to an incorrectly remembered phrase from Blaise Pascal's Pensées: "Three degrees of latitude upset
the whole of jurisprudence and one meridian determines what is true.” See Blaise Pascal, Pensées (Trans. A. J. Krailsheimer) New York:
Penguin, 1995.
21 See Erich von Stroheim, Poto-Poto, Paris: Editions de la Fontaine, 1956, p. 132.
22 Joris-Karl Huysmans (1848-1907) was a French novelist and art critic most famous for the novel À rebours (1884), published in English
as Against the Grain or Against Nature.
23 Jean des Esseintes is the protagonist of À rebours. The last scion of an aristocratic family, Des Esseintes is an eccentric, reclusive, ailing
aesthete who detests nineteenth-century bourgeois society and tries to retreat into an ideal artistic world of his own creation.
24 Nazarín (1959) is a satirical Mexican drama directed by Buñuel from a script he co-wrote with Julio Alejandro. The plot concerns a priest
in a poor community who lives a charitable life in accordance with his religious principles, but many others do not return the favor.
25 Viridiana (1961) is a film by Buñuel concerning a novice nun who becomes the obsession of a middle-aged man whose dead wife she
resembles, and later of the son who inherits his property after the man kills himself from shame at his treatment of the girl.
26 The Wedding March (1928) is a film by Stroheim the footage for which was originally cut into two films (the second being The
Honeymoon, now lost) before being re-edited for release as a single movie. Starring Fay Wray, the plot revolves around a nobleman from a
rundown family who falls in love with a commoner girl but who is forced to marry a rich socialite.
27 Greed (1924), considered Stroheim's masterpiece and perhaps the greatest film of the silent era, is a meticulous adaptation of Frank
Norris's novel Mcteague, which tells the story of of McTeague, a San Francisco dentist, who marries his best friend Schouler's girlfriend
Trina. The film was brutally cut by the studios and the original version forever lost, though in recent years an attempt was made to partially
restore it.
28 Luchino Visconti (1906-1976) was one of the fathers of Italian Neo-realism, although later moved towards luxurious epics dealing with
themes of beauty, decadence, death and European history. His 1943 directorial debut, Ossessione, was followed by La terra trema (The
Earth Trembles, 1948), based on the Giovanni Verga’s novel I Malavoglia. During the 1950s and 1960s, Visconti veered away from the
neorealist path, notably with Senso (1954) and The Leopard (1963). His so-called “German Trilogy” includes The Damned (1969), Death in
Venice (1971) and Ludwig (1972). Visconti was also a stage director of plays and opera. Deleuze will discuss his cinema more extensively in
Cinema II: The Time-image.
29 Raymond Roussel (1877-1933) was a French poet, novelist, playwright, musician and chess enthusiast. Through his works he exerted a
profound influence on certain groups including the Surrealists, Oulipo and the authors of the Nouveau Roman. His work is notable for its
inscrutable surfaces and extreme density, its wealth of puns, double entendres and homonyms. Roussel’s best-known books include

                                                                                                                                                   24

Impressions of Africa (1910) and Locus Solus (1914). His long poem Nouvelle Impressions d’Afrique (1932) famously includes long
digressions and footnotes in rhyming alexandrines.
30 Deleuze refers to this story from Roussel's Locus Solus and its connections with Buñuel in more detail in Cinema 1: The Movementimage. “In Locus Solus, eight corpses in a glass cage reproduce the event of their life; and Lucius Egroizard, artist and scholar of genius, who
has gone mad after the murder of his daughter, repeats indefinitely the circumstances of the murder until he invents a machine to record the
voice of a singer, deforms it, and restores so accurately the voice of his dead child that he regains everything: daughter, happiness. It moves
from an indefinite repetition to repetition as decisive instant, from a closed repetition to an open repetition, from a repetition which not only
fails, but induces failure, to a repetition which not only succeeds, but recreates the model or the originary,” pp. 131-132.
31 Johan August Strindberg (1849-1912) was a Swedish playwright, novelist, poet, essayist and painter.
32 See Søren Kierkegaard, Repetition and Philosophical Crumbs (Trans. M.G. Piety, Oxford: OUP, 2009). In the spirit of Kierkegaard's
other writings, Repetition was written and initially published under an ironically “repetitive” pseudonym, Constantine Constantius. The book
is divided into two sections. In the first Constantius seeks a new model of modern philosophy that would replace the Platonic idea of
recollection with that of repetition, saying that these two concepts embody the same movement but in different directions. The former, turned
towards an illusory attempt to recover the past, is a bad repetition, while the latter, which completely renounces the past, opens itself to a
salutary repetition which may arrive from the future or from an unforeseen outside source. In the second part, adopting a slightly mocking
tone, Constantinius dispenses epistolary advice based on his reflections and evoking the biblical trials of Job to a sensitive 'young man' who
has broken up with his girlfriend and who wonders how or whether to keep his love for her alive.
33 Dom Juan (1665) is a five-act comedy by Molière based upon the Spanish legend of Don Juan Tenorio. The aristocrat Dom Juan seduces,
marries and abandons Elvira, whom he discards as just another romantic conquest. Later, he invites to dinner the statue of a man whom he
recently had murdered. In the course of their second evening, the stone statue of the murdered man charms, deceives and leads Dom Juan to
Hell.
34 The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie (orig. Le charme discret de la bourgeoisie, 1972) is a film by Buñuel from a screepnplay he cowrote with Jean-Claude Carrière, starring Fernando Rey, Stéphane Audran, Jean-Pierre Cassel, Bulle Ogier and Delphine Seyrig. It centres
around five failed attempts of a group of bourgeois Parisians to have lunch together intertwined with the dreams of four of the characters.
35 The Exterminating Angel (orig. El ángel exterminador, 1962) is a surreal, supernatural drama directed by Buñuel which follows a group
of wealthy guests who, after a lavish dinner party in a luxurious mansion house, find themselves mysteriously unable to leave, a situation
which results in chaos and a number of bizarre deaths.
36 Alain Robbe-Grillet (1922-2008) was a novelist and filmmaker. One of the key figures of the Nouveau Roman movement, he began his
filmmaking career writing the screenplay of Alain Resnais's L'Année dernière à Marienbad. His own films, which are characterised by a
fragmented structure of temporally disoriented repetitions and variations of tableaux-like scenes, often involving elements of fetishism and
sexual perversion, include L'Immortelle (1962), Trans-Europ Express (1966), L'homme qui ment (1968), L'Eden et après (1970), Glissements
progressifs du plaisir (1974), Le jeu avec le feu (1975) and La belle captive (1983). Deleuze discusses the cinema of Robbe-Grillet more
fully in Cinema II: The Time-image.
37 In his memoir, My Last Sigh, Buñuel writes of The Exterminating Angel: “In life, as in film, I’ve always been fascinated by repetition.
Why certain things tend to repeat themselves over and over again I have no idea, but the phenomenon intrigues me enormously. There are at
least a dozen repetitions in The Exterminating Angel. Two men introduce themselves and shake hands, saying, ‘Delighted!’ They meet again
a moment later and repeat the routine as if they’d never seen each other before. The third time, they greet each other with great enthusiasm,
like two old friends. Another repetition occurs when the guests enter the hall and the host calls his butler twice; in fact, it’s the exact same
scene, but shot from different angles." See Luis Buñuel, My Last Sigh, (Trans. Abigail Israel) New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1983 p. 239.
38 For a more detailed analysis of repetition in Buñuel's films see Cinema I: The Movement-image, pp. 132-133.
39 The Milky Way (orig. La Voie lactée, 1969) is a film directed by Buñuel starring Laurent Terzieff, Paul Frankeur, Delphine Seyrig,
Georges Marchal and Michel Piccoli. The title of the film refers to a popular name used for the Way of St. James, a route of religious
pilgrimage running from northern Europe to Santiago de Compostela in Spain. The film follows the picaresque journey of two vagabond
travelers, for whom the pilgrimage seems to be a means of escape. Along the way, they witness a series of bizarre incidents involving
persons named in documented heresies from different epochs of Catholic Church history. At key moments they also encounter Jesus and the
Virgin Mary, as well as modern believers and fanatics.
40 See Maurice Drouzy, Luis Buñuel, architecte du rêve, Edition Lherminier, 1978, referred to extensively in Deleuze's discussion of Buñuel
in Cinema I: The Movement-image, pp. 126-133.

                                                                                                                                         25

41 Break Up (1965) is a film by Marco Ferreri starring Marcello Mastroianni, Catherine Spaak and Ugo Tognazzi, which follows the
adventures of a Milanese entrepreneur who becomes obsessed with how much air a balloon can take before it breaks. His inability to control
this fixation eventually destroys his perfect life and leads him to madness.