1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Leibniz and the Baroque – Principles and Freedom

Lecture 20, 2 June 1987: Principles and Freedom (15) -- Course on Harmony,
including Students’ Interventions

Transcribed and translated by Charles J. Stivale (duration, 1:15:45)1

Part 1

I have the feeling that some among you, judging only from all this equipment, are here
for a final course. I would like to tell you something about final courses: final courses
always happen, but not always at the moment that one thinks. Final courses have always
already happened. The final course was the previous course or the time before that.

So, today’s session is not at all a final course. Today, it’s something completely different.
And I had indicated to you that I was hoping that we would gather together, a certain
number among you who have participated in this course this year or worked together, in
order to initiate some new research directions as a function of what we have done this
year. And on this topic, what I was expecting is for some of you who are particularly
competent, in my view, to speak, and for me to say nothing at all. [Laughter] I will just
ask questions. I’ve already done my final course. So this is how with these lights, I don’t
know where you’re going to put them… [Deleuze refers to the film crew] I don’t see very
well… This will be a silent movie! [Laughter] So, this is perfect because I see that we
agree entirely, but don’t count on me for a final course with these lights… Final courses,
you’ll keep on missing them. A final course is not filmed because, I don’t mean that it’s
nothing, but it has always happened yesterday,… or never.

Fine. So, what is this thematic reflection (relance) that I wanted all about? Some among
you had graciously accepted the following principle: we have spent a year on this very
strange, engaging author, Leibniz, and then this theme of harmony constantly was
floating about, the harmony of souls between themselves, the harmony of souls and
bodies, etc.; and then we noticed each time in passing that this is quite interesting because
harmony, harmony, harmony – connecting harmony to the soul, we could create an entire
history of philosophy from this. It’s well known that from the side of Pythagoras, from
Plato, harmony, the soul, are not without relations. But we would say, no, that’s not it.
We would say that there’s something else: we would say that with Leibniz, it’s
nonetheless curious because harmony, we assumed, must be in the process of taking on a
transformative sense (sens tournant). Immediately, something that has always been our
method while working together, something reached out to invite us in: what reached out
to us was music because, after all, in the same period, something was happening that
especially resembled the unfolding of an entirely new notion of harmony.

Is it therefore the case once again that in one of the most creative of philosophies and in
one of the most creative of musical movements something was not going to resonate,
without copying each other or applying to each other? But when Leibniz sought to

                                                                                              2

liberate harmony from certain notions with which it had been confused up to then; and
when musicians were going to discovery harmony by liberating it, let’s say – I am
speaking very grossly – liberating it from certain attachments of counterpoint, aren’t
there things here important for us?

And [I am] also adding, before I can cease speaking, precisely that our method has
deliberately been a bit monstrous. I mean – when I have spoken about this to some here
on whom I particularly rely for their help, they gave a first reaction that was not entirely
favorable – this was something monstrous there, at first glance, it was that this requires
[us] henceforth to listen to some music. I would like you to understand, and you won’t
have any trouble because this has always been our method, and since we will be working
together, you will be less surprised. But I dream of a reversal of a certain method; this is
philosophy becoming illustrative of something else. I make no claim for pieces, for
example, musical examples that would have us understand what occurs in harmony. I
make a claim precisely for the opposite: there are, for example, in Leibniz some
philosophical examples that will help you understand, perhaps, what occurs in music.
Those who worked with me on cinema may recall that never did we use a
cinematographic example. To the contrary, it was philosophy that needed to serve us as
an example for concepts of cinema. It’s this reversal of examples that appears important
to me, and therefore we are going to speak about music without hearing a single musical
piece.

On the other hand, those here who will derive something from this last… from this
session, they’ll go listen to some music, but I also believe they’ll go listen to some
Leibniz and will receive from Leibniz a certain musical understanding, and not only
philosophical. I always am pleading for the necessity of a double reading of great
philosophers who must be read philosophically, of course, if one can, but if you might not
have the philosophical background to read a great philosopher, you always have perfectly
the aesthetic culture, and there are musical readings, there are pictorial readings of great
philosophers, or affective readings of great philosophers. It’s not that you would lose
nothing; you would then lose the purely conceptual aspect, but something very deep
which is philosophy itself will remain. But there still is an affective reading of Spinoza
that has always coexisted with a conceptual reading. There is a musical reading of
Leibniz that coexists with his conceptual reading.

Hence my invitation to several of you because I was saying… Ok, I am really stating
some extremely surface remarks and also extremely broad… Let’s assume [that] this
period [is] a period in which harmony changes its status, with what we call harmony
tending to change and undergo a mutation. Let’s assume that, for example, harmony is no
longer defined by intervals, [Pause] but it’s defined by accords. Harmony would be
defined by accords. Then perhaps an entirely new manner of treating dissonances would
be opened; [Pause] an entirely new domain of inner components of sound would be
deepened. [Pause] The discovery of a certain tonality under the theme of tonal centers
and centers of attraction would occur. A whole group appears here, harmony referring to
accords, the organization of tonalities of center, or centers of attraction. Fine, it’s on this
first point that I have asked two of you who have worked with us this year to bring a little
clarity to the topic, because the question for us is: does this new harmony, for example,

                                                                                             3

that refers to accords and no longer exactly to intervals, is this new harmony described as
possessing a fundamental characteristic of Baroque music? Isn’t this what Leibniz, in a
different way, is undertaking? And when he speaks to us of the harmony of soul and
body, he defines it through accords, which is something absolutely new philosophically,
and no longer by what? No longer by intervals or by influences.

And when Leibniz tells us that he distinguishes three means of conceiving the relation of
soul and body -- influence, assistance, and “assent” (consentement) – doesn’t he circle
around notions that are much more musical than we might have first believed? [Pause]
[There is] influence, referring to melody for reasons that would require me to do a course,
were I to feel more confident on the matter; [there is] assistance, referring to a certain
type of counterpoint and to an evolution of counterpoint; and [there is] assent, appealing
then to a new conception of the accord and of accords.

But finally, it’s on this that I would like… I asked Pascale Criton and [Vincent] Valls
[First name appears later in the session; however, the spelling of the last name may not
be precise] to unravel this history in which Baroque music circulates around this
mutation of harmony. And we would almost have to say… Well yes, you are speaking to
philosophers, to people who don’t know music, and you are going to help them grasp a
musical concept.

Pascale Criton: Yes, should I … [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Oh, of course, you can proceed as you wish, and if I have something to ask, I
will, fine.

[Pascale Criton begins to speak]2 [13:00-18:50]

Deleuze: Excuse me, can I ask a question? Just one question. What strikes me, if I
understand well, you are in the process of telling us about the condition through which
harmony is discovered and is defined through the accord, and not through the interval.
[PC: Yes] It’s first a new regime of voices. [PC: Yes] and not the reverse, is this right?
[PC: No, that is…] This is what I would like for you to better indicate, that is, [Here
starts the video of the session] there wouldn’t be determinable harmony through the
accord if we passed through the new regime of voices.3

PC: There were indeed accords; there was a notion of accord… It’s a vertical accord that
traversed the aggregate (ensemble) of voices.

Deleuze: That’s it, yes.

PC: Whereas it’s no longer… what regulated the aggregate of voices. So here, we pass
into a phenomenon… It’s small texts that are located in the Florentine Camerata, in
Montiverdi, and the authors from the period, that greatly supported the singers’ abilities.
That is, these are singers who discovered this way of creating and invented with the
composers… That is, a continuous, constant and deliberate encounter took place, a very
close collaboration between poets, lyric poets like Petrarch… no, not Petrarch… Tasso…

                                                                                                 4

finally, there were several, [Ottavio] Rinuccini, singers with composers. [Jump in film
editing]

Deleuze: I need to say that your question is important to me because either we say – and
this seems to be your opinion – either we say, well fine, there is a new regime of voices,
and it’s this regime of voices that made possible the new emergence, the emergence of a
new harmony determinable as accord; [Pause] or one might say – which would suit me
better, but if it’s wrong, if it’s not possible to say, well, too bad, it’s not a problem – or
what would suit me better is to say that, you understand, they were coming into an
ageless turning point of Renaissance [Return to the film] already entering into a struggle
or conflict of two possible directions that ordinarily we call, speaking vulgarly, the
horizontal and the vertical. Melody is horizontal by nature, is called horizontal, and
harmony with accords, the accords between sounds, implying a vertical control crossing
over several horizontal lines.

And then, I jump over to a very different aspect. There is one thing, my horizontal
pathway of melodic music, my vertical construction of accords; here eventually harmony
will only be defined by the accord when the vertical line acquires, for various reasons, a
kind of autonomy. Look then at the history of music – and I emphasize this is what I dare
call history of music – which will pose the real problem, that there has always been in
music, always the diagonals that existed as accords, like in painting, like everywhere…
So all of that was very abstract. [Jump in the film]

But a second point: [Return to the film] so there was a great musical problem in general,
putting into play the concept, specifically of horizontal melody and vertical harmony, and
their diagonal combination. And there is a completely different problem: that music has
always been an assemblage, a machinery, and creating music is arranging (machiner)
voices and instruments, and instruments with voices, and that the instruments-voices
machinery, the voices-instruments assemblage, has always had very, very important
variations. And that… So here, I come back to Pascale’s first topic. Yes, in counterpoint,
voices and instruments are strictly – something that already represents developments of
genius, understand? This isn’t at all negative – are in a certain way interchangeable. What
does interchangeable mean? Anyway, I am speaking quickly; you who know the material
will correct me… I already notice your very severe gaze, and that bothers me a little.
[Deleuze indicates Pascale Criton] Let’s just assume…

And then, with the beginning of Baroque music, on the other hand, here I return, no,
rather I refer to what Pascale just said [Deleuze speaks directly to Pascale Criton]. There
are very strong differences in nature between voices, hence the importance of continuous
bass, right? This whole history of bass and high notes, but there are going to be new
relations between voices-instruments that will then engender a kind of machination
between voices, and between voices and instruments that is entirely different [Pause]
such that, so there we are, just my comment that… By causing harmony-accords rather to
depend on the history of voices, couldn’t one consider that is like having two sides?

Richard Pinhas: I have something to say… It’s very important. Ok. While I emphasize
that all Pascale said is absolutely correct, it seems to me there are… It’s nonetheless

                                                                                              5

important; there’s a kind of reversal that could be established, notably that the
modification is notinternal to the musical machine, it’s there secondarily, not that this
would be less important, but just as important, but secondarily, reaching the level of
voices, that is, it’s after the fact that voices are going to be transformed. What happens
with the passage from Classical music in that era and the passage to the Baroque, which
is a revolutionary act and that is marked by very, very specific steps? I am trying to name
them, principally Montiverdi, [Dieterich] Buxtehude and Bach, given that they are
witnessing something that will be the “music of spheres” that arrives, that is, a music that
is really going to be a music of pre-established harmony, universal harmony, demanded
as such by the musicians, with the result that – this is yet another parenthesis within a
parenthesis – there is a parallel and continuous development of music on the level of
what is concerns harmony and what concerns philosophy, at the level of what is preestablished harmony in Leibniz.

So what is happening in Baroque music, once we say that this is going to link to a
development of voices? But coming after the fact, there’s first the establishment of
consonances of basses that come effectively to replace the usual melodic counterpoints.
We have a floating dominant on the level of tonality, that is, we have the initiation of a
tonality that is going to pass from a floating to a fixed dominant. There will be a kind of
modulation and continuous variation of tempo, as Pascale said, and there’s a very
important term in music, as we saw the last time with Rameau. I am thinking that it’s a
term that has very precise philosophical resonances: we shall see a majorized inflection.
So, in general, these are the technical points coming to mark the sound machine itself.

And the most important point on the level of this change that is practically a revolution
on the musical level that is fully undertaken starting with Montiverdi and that certainly
has repercussions on the level of treatment of voices, but that is fundamentally a change
in the musical machine itself, that is, we pass from intervals to a suite of accords. There is
passage from a nearly pre-Baroque world, incarnated by philosophers like Jakob Böhme
or [Marin] Marsenne, to something that is continuity, to a kind of infinite harmony, an
infinite continuum incarnated [Deleuze is heard making growling noises] also by Bach in
music, and by…

So I am finishing: what is very, very important is what happens to bass consonances, and
bass consonances are going to become true referents. And what would be important for
you to explain [he addresses Pascale Criton], because I think that you started to earlier,
is this: these terms consonance and resonance, that are so important for a musician, they
have, I think of their counterpart in philosophy and especially in Leibniz, and these
consonances and resonances, that are going to give life to a whole series of harmonics,
that are precisely going to be resonance and consonance of accords between each other
that give birth to a new world, which is going to be the world of harmony, the world of
the music of spheres, the world of pre-established harmony in music. And I think that if
you defined a bit what in music is consonance and resonance, if you could manage to
explain that, it would be really great, then, once we’ve said that… fine.

Deleuze: So I’m the one who messed everything up by placing… because now, this is
getting complicated, at least for me, it’s becoming even more interesting because, you

                                                                                             6

see, everything is happening as if we could say three things [Deleuze looks toward
Pinhas]: Pascale was saying in her presentation, she was telling us: be very aware that
something new emerges at the level of voices, and that it’s this difference that explodes
on the level of voices, that was not encompassed in the preceding music, in the music of
the Renaissance. It’s this difference that will make possible harmony by accord. I
intervened then rather timidly by saying that it would suit me better – one can always try
– it would suit me better if for the moment, we considered this as two independent
variables. On the one hand, for reasons yet to be considered, and that Richard also has
just suggested, harmony is defined by accord and not by… the… I cannot recall what…
[Students provide an answer] … by interval. And on the other hand, the voiceinstruments machinery is not at all produced in the same way. [Jump in the film]

[The session continues with Pascale Criton speaking, her brief comments barely audible
in the audio recordings; Deleuze listens while smoking a cigarette]

PC: … the heritage of written music, of scholarly music. I am not saying …

Deleuze: Yes.

PC: … that instruments do not exist – it would be crazy to say that – but writing for
instruments did not exist.

Deleuze: That’s right!

PC: So, we cannot say that voice came afterwards. It’s absolutely…

Deleuze: But we can consider that being a state of a machinery that introduces no
difference.

PC: Yes, absolutely. There is an exchange. There is an exchange, but the exchange is
nonetheless, during the entire beginning of the Baroque era, very important.

Deleuze: It’s what you earlier called equality… It’s what you yourself called equality.

PC: Yes, but it seems to me that it’s very important to sense what happens at the start of
Baroque music because there’s a rupture: it’s the rupture of a world. There is the writing
of counterpoint by Buxtehude, for example, but a bit later. This is in Germany, and in
Germany, Baroque came very, very late, and they conserved the writing of counterpoint,
and they never let go of it…

Deleuze: Agreed. So there is no problem on this. But Richard’s third position was: can’t
we still begin by defining the Baroque contribution of accords? Hence his request to
recommence with a definition of consonances and resonances, I believe. [PC: Yes.] To
begin by the problem of accords ...

RP: … and harmonic resonances…

Deleuze: … and harmonic resonances… yes?

                                                                                              7

PC: But dissonances are not harmonic at the start; they are melodic, they are expressive,
and it’s the fact that voices express things [Pause]… It’s the fact of such an expressivity
of voices that enables chromatics.

Deleuze: This is very interesting, you see, because here, I don’t know if you are correct,
but you have rejustified and are maintaining your primary point (primat), with a small
difference: you maintain your primary point about voices which, in your view, to
understand the problem, one has to start from voices. It’s quite possible… [PC tries to
intervene], but I want to emphasize…

PC: But instruments are employed to imitate voices in that period.

RP: Can I make a comment? It’s that…

PC: All the instrumental notations are "col contare”, [Deleuze: Yes!] as the voices [do],
etc. All these imitations of…

Deleuze: Here you have a very specific historical argument…

RP: Only one thing, and it’s not at all a negation in relation to what Pascale said, but
rather a confirmation. It’s that chromatics is, effectively, one of the fundamental
components that’s going to enter into the construction of Baroque music. And this kind of
generalization in the more open chromatics in relation to what is going to developed
subsequently, but it’s very, very important because it’s a kind of reversal in music.
Besides, if we are speaking about a turned-back chromatics also in Montiverdi, it’s a
chromatics that is fully born with Montiverdi, that fully belongs to his style and is applied
to music itself, and after the fact or at the same time, but it’s by inference, and nearly by
deference that it is going to be applied to voices. The only thing that shocks me a bit,
finally, that bothers me a bit, is in saying that music did not preexist before the Baroque,
and that everything is overdetermined by voices.

Deleuze: Let’s leave that… Let’s leave that, because what interests me is the difference
of the two positions, but I feel already that there is no conflict. [To Pascale] You do
support, in fact… It would be nice to know why you maintain this, because this interests
me with reference to Leibniz, why you maintain this…

PC: Because in counterpoint, everything is dissonant – and again, I hope you understand
me; I am dropping a lot for everyone’s benefit – at the Renaissance period, they
emphasized resonance, the principles of resonance that are the primary resonances of
sound. And the principle, it isn’t… it’s governed… attention is paid, in fact, to voices
being superposed while respecting resonance.

RP: Can you explain a bit what your [understanding of] resonance is because it’s
important for everyone.

PC: Yes, but what will interest us more is consonance, it’s consonance. Resonance…

                                                                                           8

Deleuze: Yes, yes [Deleuze intervenes to reorient the discussion] Continue… I don’t
think you need to explain it. No, just continue… Consonance, resonance, I assume we
will get there [after]… Continue by just using the terms…

PC: And in the writing of counterpoint that governs the unit of resonance, the
dissonances are readied, that is, it’s an entire game of writing of counterpoint. It’s
movement. Why aren’t voices going to collide? Why are they always going to be able to
leave some air, a space between each other?

Deleuze: This is a wonderful opening to say that. You are completely correct. And I don’t
need to make… This is a raw application. What must we retain about pre-established
harmony in Leibniz? It’s an opening of the famous “the best of possible worlds,” it’s a
wonderful opening toward dissonances. It’s the art of dissonance.

PC: There you are. Absolutely, and what I would like to add: is when I say voice, when I
speak of counterpoint and I say voice, I am not necessarily saying singing voice. This is
what’s called … We say voice in music, that is, the conduct of voices, whether they are
instrumental or vocal. We call that “a voice.” I would like to emphasize that each time
“voice” is used, I don’t mean “singing voice.”

Deleuze: Of course, of course, of course … I wanted… So here we are... I am reading
from a classic book on Baroque music: “Whereas harmony by interval from the
Renaissance only allowed perfect chords and sixth chords, other combinations being
founded on delays (retards), the polarity between bass and soprano,” and this supports
what you are saying, “opens the door to new harmonic possibilities that, for conservative
minds of the period, seems to be the start of chaos.”4 That is, it’s dissonances, it’s the
world of dissonances. So there we see a little something before you come back to… You,
you, [Deleuze speaks to Vincent Valls] how do you grasp the questions in relation to the
point we’ve reached? … You can say something quite different from what has already
been stated.

Vincent Valls: I agree fundamentally with Pascale. So I have very little to add. [Pause] I
think that there is something fundamental, it’s that music, Franco-Flemish polyphony is
also above all a sacred music that refused expressivity, in my view, and it’s this desire to
cause the expression of feelings to enter into the music that is going to pass through the
accompanied monody and use of chromatics of certain formulae. [Pause] I also think that
there is a relation in the text and the voice…

Deleuze: [Pause] Right… Here you can ask… and perhaps the question is premature
because I am not at all confident about what I’m saying, that’s obvious. When you say,
both of you, before… [Pause] There weren’t any…, well I’m simplifying… There wasn’t
any expressivity, I would tend to think rather that the Baroque discovery of harmony had
founded an entirely new expressivity, and that it’s this new expressivity that was going to
cause a scandal. Because, before, there certainly was an expressivity. Music was perfectly
expressive, and it seems to me that it’s confirmed by all those – let’s call them this to
make it easier – all those reactionaries at the time of Baroque music, all of them who

                                                                                            9

wanted to go backwards, and who had as principal theme “the Baroque, or discovery of
accords, harmony through accords,” [Interruption of the recordings] [40:23]

Part 2

Deleuze: [… all of them who wanted to go backwards] tossed expressivity into the air.
The true expressivity, was what? For them, it was inflection. It was melodic inflection,
but it’s presented as the sole expressivity. [Return to the recording] So, for example, I
take an author who, musically, was in fact well behind in his era, Rousseau. His position
against Baroque harmony, Rousseau’s position against Baroque harmony, is eternally…
But… You kill expressivity. Expressivity isn’t dependent on accords. What they found
fault in Baroque music especially was for much more, to have pretended – and this is
what interests me as regards Leibniz – it’s to have pretended to make expressivity depend
on accords. And we indeed see what they mean. How do you have the expressive emerge
from an accord of sounds? [Pause, then addressing Pascale Criton] That’s not it?

PC: That’s not it. It’s the opposite.

RP: I would like just to add a small comment… Wait, just a small comment…5 For the
people [here] who are unfamiliar, it might be necessary to give them access to how
people were listening to music at the start of the [twentieth] century, the Pierrot lunaire
by Schoenberg. The inflection of the recitative, it’s exactly what happens in Montiverdi’s
compositions.6 What happens is that there’s a kind of radical twisting that is inflicted, on
one hand, to the text, and on the other hand, to the major melodic line and to the
continuous lines. And there, in the same inflection in another register, it’s exactly the
same thing with the appearance of the major works by Schoenberg.

But the principal thing that I wanted to say [is] that, perhaps beyond what has been said
about expressivity, on the harmonic change itself, although the problem of harmonic
souls becomes preponderant, and I insist on this, the fact that there is a fixed dominant in
the place of the floating dominant, I believe is a very, very important point. We return
into a world with the Baroque music of simultaneity, and effectively we pass into a world
of the vertical, that is, there is a complete shift of axis. And from this is a revolution is
embodied, and in total resonance we link up to Leibniz’s contribution because it seems to
me that Leibniz’s philosophy is the opening, the entry into a world of simultaneity.

Vincent Valls: What’s also there… The fixed dominant assumes a unity of scale, and that
comes later. The unified scale does not exist at the time of Montiverdi. You have to wait
nearly a century, [Deleuze: Yes.] and that will vary according to the country. The
unification of scale will develop much more quickly in Germany. Bach writes in an
entirely unified scale, including minor tones, with the three minor tones eventually able
to be superposed. Whereas at the same period in France, the minor mode still fluctuates
more; it is not yet completely unified. But I would even tend to say that composers like
Montiverdi are not seeking this unification because that allows them precisely so much to
play on the ambiguity, to play on both levels (tableaux) …

Deleuze: Of course.

                                                                                            10

Valls: … and this is what can be heard quite well… there’s a work that is, for me,
relatively important, Montiverdi’s Orfeo, because there we find this radical difference
between the pastoral scenes that are not yet tonal, but we see what initiates a relation of
scale, thus a tonic dominant relation that is opposed to all the recitative parts other works
or Orfeo itself which are much more modal and are opposed. That allows them
[composers] to play (on the levels) and to have, on one hand, a harmony derived from
dance music that is pastoral music, and on the other hand, to have a kind of wandering
that allows them to express and to oppose two sentiments.

Deleuze: In this, I follow you entirely, but in my view, we only have one problem in this
regard. If you mean that such mutation occurs over long periods of time, this is true not
only for music, but also for philosophy. That is, for example, we cannot say that, with
Leibniz, there’s only this that takes place. He is still playing… there are certain elements
from Cartesianism that continue, and certain elements from the Renaissance that
continue, and he plays with all that. And what you are saying about a musician, is also
true for a philosopher, is also true for a painter. In my view that does not prevent there
being what we can call "rigors of the concept," the concept not saying, "from this
moment on, there’s this", but the concept precisely enhancing the importance of seeds of
innovation that are still at work in the former state, how they are going to precipitate,
break loose, etc. Here we are… Of course, we must add that all the time markers that you
state.

PC: However, this is important because the bipolarity of bass and melody remain; these
are new relations. That is, there are forces, new forces that enter into play, and these
forces, they are… little by little, the accords, whereas they were applied to support the
instrumental or vocal play, they become functional little by little; they enter into this new
rapport that is that of alternate form, opposed form, dialogue, responses from group to
group, levels that communicate with one another. [Deleuze: Yes?] This is how little by
little the accords have rapports of tension between themselves, rapports of force. So there
is an essential rapport that is born which is the rapport of the fifth, [Deleuze: Yes!] that
will be determinant for the construction of the system of consonances. The fifth is a…
When a sound is made to resonate, there is therefore a series of harmonics, which is…
The strongest harmonic is the one that returns most often, and which is the most
determinant factor for the identity of sound.

Deleuze: But here, excuse me, but could you quickly just give me a general idea, for
everyone, this list of accords?

PC: There is an accord in the sound, yes.

Deleuze: Dominant, tonic… what would the order be? … Intertonals…

PC: What you need to understand is that the sound is an accord in itself. The sound is an
accord. We construct scales by flattening (couchant) the accord that is in the resonance of
the sound. [Deleuze: Good !] This is something that is simultaneous and flattened, and
returned to the horizontal, and that gives points that constitute the tonal scale, the scale of

                                                                                            11

the tonic. And this is a relation of parentage that is created in a tension. And this tension
is continued by the harmonic that is the fifth, that is the third harmonic.

Deleuze: So there is a tonic center already…

PC: Yes, there is a tonic center that is a point X, a point where we take a sound and say
that this sound characterizes…

Deleuze: And then there are harmonics…

PC: That’s it.

Deleuze: I have a tonic center and harmonics.

PC: But every sound…

Deleuze: What is it that gives me the dominant in this?

PC: The dominant is the fact that when we hear a sound, we don't assume that it came
from nothing; one assumes that it comes from a resonant state and so that it proceeds
from another sound. [Deleuze: Yeh?] A do, a re, a mi, it isn't given just like that, a priori.
It's generated by something else.

Deleuze: Sub-dominant...

PC: Wait. No, no, no, that's not it. It's generated by the fact that, in a sound, the first
harmonic is the harmonic that redoubles this sound; that is, we have a do, the harmonic,
it's going to be the do from above, the other octave, which is in a rapport of identity.
There is no alterity, that is, this do is going to have the same harmonics, and that won't
open anything; there will be no generation. The first generation is the second important
harmonic; it's the one that will return the most often, but in second importance, let's say,
and that's going to be the fifth. Bum, baaa... [PC sings two sounds, then laughs] There
you have a fifth, and it's the dominant, the dominant of all sound. It's the fifth, or
dominant... How to express this? It's the expression of the first alterity of a sound; it's
what is going to generate a cycle, what is going to open the sounds to one another. -- Is
this ok? -- And this is important because it's here that there is a tension which results in
the sounds not being juxtaposed measures, but having a dynamic rapport with one
another, a rapport in which resonance is conceived as something extremely precise. One
cannot just stroll around any which way. And the way in which the first accords of
Baroque acted was not yet stressed (tendu), was not yet dynamic. And I believe there is –
this is how I explain this; I believe that certain people feel this in music -- there's a link
between the fact that there's a dramatic tension, an opening of tensions in music, in the
pathetic, in the expression proper to Baroque resulting in our needing to find supports in
sounds that are going to construct progressions of tension, progressions that are going to
become more and more hierarchical, that are going to become functional in relation to
one another.... Am I going too quickly?

Deleuze: Excuse me for coming back to my question right away: these discoveries

                                                                                            12

belong...

PC: ... to the Baroque, to the cycle of fifths.

Deleuze: To the analysis of the accord, of harmony by accord...

PC: Yes, but that all occurs slowly because, for example, Rameau has a...

Deleuze: Agreed, that happens very slowly under the conditions that Vincent has
[explained]…

PC: And it's very connected to the needs of music, [Deleuze: Right] for expressing
things.

Deleuze: Fine, but isn't this a path precisely in which you could create your explication
independently of the problem of voices?

PC: Ehhhhh... [Pause for reflection] I don't know; no, not really.

Deleuze: Not really…

PC: All authors who have been determinant and have really established the norms…

Deleuze: Yes, that interests me.

PC: … have begun by working with voices. The madrigal is really the form [The very
loud noise of a plane is heard] that evolves most quickly and yields the most.

Deleuze: I understand.

PC: There is not one madrigalist who didn't create a madrigal yielding an innovation
between the years...

Deleuze: But I can't say that these conditions… that this behavior of voices was a
condition for this new organization of harmony by accords?

PC: Wait, can you repeat? The condition of voices was a condition of...

Deleuze: ... was a simple condition for the discovery of this harmony by accords and of
determinations of this harmony by accords... [Jump in the film] One second [Deleuze
resists being interrupted] My concern is always whether I can separate the two
conceptual lines or can't separate them ... [Jump in film editing]

PC: Certainly, you can separate them; you can separate them, but… [The next comments
by PC, approximately 90 seconds, are barely audible]

                                                                                         13

Deleuze: Yes, that would interest me all the more so since this would then be two lines:
philosophically, this would be two different lines in Leibniz that would also converge and
intersect…

PC: [Comments still inaudible, another 50 seconds, then return to the film track] Bach
uses and reengages (relance) these voices by crossing with fifths all the diatonic degrees.
[Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes] There is this notion of cycle and this notion of graduation,
of passing... of staging of levels.

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes. I'd just like to make a point very, very quickly here. We
realize that… Those who think about Leibniz here are already aware of a small amalgam,
that when Leibniz speaks of the accord of souls between each other, we can say, fine, it’s
a way of speaking, sort of; there’s the equivalent in Malebranche, in Descartes. There’s
the equivalent for lots of philosophers. And yet, maybe not, maybe not. Perhaps he
already introduces a notion of accords that is not far from what was going on at that very
moment, or that happened in music, and that the rapports between monads, such as we
have seen them, you know… there’s a principle, dominants, sub-dominants, little matter,
but… All that is quite connected to something that is absolutely new to the extent that it’s
not as is said, a variant concerning the theories of the union of soul and body in Leibniz.
It’s not a variant; it’s something entirely new and that is connected to a new conception
of harmony, although he cannot invoke it for the reason stated by Vincent, because it’s a
conception of harmony that is being worked out, no doubt, in several domains. It’s being
worked out at once in astronomy, in physics, in mathem[atics]… [Pause] in music, in
philosophy; it’s being worked out over several decades.

And finally, we are making a bit of a step forward. Do you have something to add,
Vincent?

Valls: Not for the moment.

Deleuze: Not for the moment. [Deleuze turns toward the blackboard, speaking to Richard
Pinhas] And you’d like to…?

RP: No, it’s just a drawing of a table of harmonies so that people might see… When a
sound is emitted, fundamentally [Pinhas refers to a drawing he has made on the board[,
there are the resonances that arrive through levels, exactly as Pascale explained, that we
see in a projected manner. We are able to understand that it happens by the fifth, the
third, the seventh, the ninth, etc., once we have stated that the table of harmonies begins
through steps. Harmony is a fundamental partial of sound that comes… The terms are
very important because the notion of harmony, which for us is fundamental in Leibniz, is
fundamental also in music and notably at this period because there is simply, as you said
earlier, Pascale, a zone of fusion that occurs between the vertical and the horizontal, and
it’s this zone of fusion in which Baroque will be born.

So the relation of consonances of accords is as if there were kinds of projections of
virtuality. The resonances of the accord, the table of harmonics, are literally the
virtualities. We are in a world in which temporality reigns – temporality isn’t a good

                                                                                            14

word – but where simultaneity reigns. Simultaneity is represented first by the sound, and
then by the accords, then by the succession of accords, not in their succession, but in their
interpenetration, thus on a literally vertical axis. And underneath there will be
fundamental sounds, underneath fundamental consonances; there will be a profusion and
a proliferation of virtual consonances that are actualized according to the technical means
and according to the composer’s modes of realization (effectuation). And it’s these
virtualities that we rediscover in the domain of philosophy, and notably… I would say
unconscious or nearly unconscious virtualities that are going to be actualized by the
composer and that are going to form the new system of consonances. But that is the same
as Pascale said…

Deleuze: We come back here… Perfect… Pascale and Vincent reached that point, it
seems to me, at the question of consonances.

PC: … It was concerning consonances, the bass lines instead of being attentive to the
expressivity of instrumental or vocal melodic voices become constructive of a harmonic
universe; that is, the rapport is reversed, that is, in the middle, or end of the Baroque…

Deleuze: Could you repeat…?

PC: … the rapport …

Deleuze: What is reversed?

PC: What’s reversed is the bass becoming harmonic to such a particular point, that is…
What we just spoke about, that is, what the accords contain becomes what is going…
[Pause] what is going to organize a new counterpoint. That is, the counterpoint is
resituated, returns, but it is organized in a level (plan) that is more and more architectural
through this tension that is created, that has created an architecture, really a tonic
architecture of points, of points of rapport and tensions inside vibrations of sounds. Let
me explain. -- Is this ok? -- And so, for example, what we call the bass, then what is
called modulating bass or ground bass (basses ‘ostinato’) is a bass that is going to emit
all the points through which a music composition is going to evolve and that can even
yield the general form of a composition, even a great one like the Passion, Bach’s
cantatas. It’s not only the bass line, it’s not only local; it is not going to have a local
action, so that at the start of the Baroque, it has a very, very local action, advancing
through points, through strokes (touches); it supports certain spots and the rest of the
time, it waits, whereas there, fifty years later, it is no longer waiting at all.

Valls: … is considered "harmonic rhythm"

Deleuze: That’s it. Yes?

Pascale: There you are.

Valls: [Indistinct at the start] … independent from the rhythm of voices in the direction
of the line, and that can have its own rhythm that is equally independent of the rhythm of
its bass, because through the play of reversal, there can be a same accord whereas the

                                                                                           15

rhythm of its bass has its own rhythm; there is going to be the rhythm of the harmony that
is going to be established. [Deleuze: Yes, yes…]

PC: And this rhythm of harmony that is accelerated, that is rendered dense, I believe
finally, we explain that it’s in circumstances where dramatic action had to be more and
more sustained – in the end, this is what musicians clarify – that the bass had to construct
pathways, had to construct more and more precise, more and more complex functions.
It’s this that… There is nonetheless a rapport with voices that, during the entire start of
the Baroque, I don’t know, could not be obliterated. Then, this becomes instrumental
because everything carries over into the forms of code of the concertant instrumental
style that is truly the heir of the madrigal practices, of madrigals and of… It’s difficult
not to think of voices at the start of the Baroque.

Deleuze: Here you are coming back to… [PC smiles at Deleuze’s reaction]

PC: And then, after we learn, we forget!

RP: Perhaps one can say… This is important. I believe, that the expression [is
exemplary], that the voices, and it’s quite important, are as if folded. This is the term used
in music…

Deleuze: Folded voices, yes, that exists.

RP: They are folded onto the vertical axis; it’s not a metaphor. And it’s exactly what you
said [to PC; while RP is speaking, Deleuze also speaks softly, inaudibly, to someone
beside him] That is, voices are important, but they undergo a movement of torsion onto
the vertical axis. That’s the first thing. The second thing is important in the passage into
the Baroque; it’s just a passing remark: when you [to PC] said earlier that there was the
harmonic frequency (cadenza harmonique) that arrives, and what does that mean? It’s
literally what we call, in modern terms, but somewhere that indeed corresponds also to
Leibniz’s philosophy, a placing into continuous variation of the tempo. This, this belongs
– properly speaking – to the musical material (matériau) itself. The term “material” is a
recent and relatively modern term, and that belongs to the sound matter.

Deleuze: It’s Leibnizian. There’s a continuity.

Pinhas: That’s right. So, therefore, we have a reorganization of material that also passes
through the harmonic frequency.

Deleuze: It’s the continuous bass, it’s the continuous bass, and there is the equivalent in
Leibniz – I have no need to… these are points we’ve already presented -- it has a
fundamental role, it has a fundamental role since there is even a law, it’s a law of
harmony, continuity… [Pause] Yes, very good… Yes… I am already satisfied, and so…
What do you… [Deleuze turn toward Pinhas]

Pinhas: Perhaps Pascale could explain a bit to us what happens at the level of material in
this change of the sound material itself, as for example, with the appearance of a certain
kind of orchestration, for example. They realize that… Fine, let me just give an

                                                                                            16

indication: it’s that there is going to be a very modern phenomenon like stereophony, that
is, the bipolar distribution of instruments. So let me find an example: instead of there
being an organ in the middle, or on the right, there will be an organ on the left and an
organ on the right, and [there is] no writing created for that. It’s the same for other
instruments, so a whole pile of things connect to material. And Pascale is correct in
insisting: it’s the transformation of classical music at this period into Baroque music that
occurs over a century, a century and a half, and it’s the same in philosophy. I mean that
this whole kind of mutation occurs over a fairly long period, and so writing takes form
over many successive periods. And I think that you could perhaps say something about
the organization of this material, once we say that it is fundamental, I think, in the
development of this continuity, of this simultaneity that is being born. [Pause as PC
considers RP’s statement]

PC: From the start of concertant music, in the instrumental music of Venise, it’s
especially in Venise: first there’s the Venetian school, then the school of Bologne, then
the French school, then the German school. And all this [happens] over generations that
succeed each other. And what is initiated is effectively groups of instruments that
represent… It’s tones (timbres); really it’s groups of tones, and what is important is from
the fact they are differentiated, there are string [instrument] groups that are opposed to
wind instrument groups, each one with “continuo” – each one has its continuous bass –
and it’s a formal organization that is really the beginning of all… finally, it’s the principle
of variation, of variations in the orchestration. This is where instrumental music is born
that yields the orchestra; it’s the birth of the orchestra. [Pause] … Not what you were
looking for?

Deleuze: Oh, yes, that suits me perfectly; that suits me perfectly.

PC: You know, I tried to answer you on a stricter level … well, on a rather strictly
musical level because I think that it’s up to you to make the connection with Leibniz.

Deleuze: But it’s [about] that guy [Leibniz], and as for me, here, I’m not doing anything
more! [Laughter, especially PC] I don’t want to do anything more! I just would like to
muse (rêve), so let us muse together on this: we would have to work together for another
year. Well, what would we have discussed in that case? We’d say, that’s right, we’re the
ones who can, that’s what we’ll do, because strangely all this really seems perfect to me.
It’s not a question of applying complex musical notions to Leibniz. It’s really a question
of seeking in Leibniz in what way this idea -- on the one hand, an accord of souls, on the
other hand, a kind of change of direction in which the accord of souls becomes an accord
of souls with bodies – could only was occur at the same time that a system – a system
named by Leibniz as pre-established harmony – [this idea] could only occur at the same
time as music realized (opérait) in my opinion – which [is] why I insisted on it, that I
always was trying to reintroduce the independence of two factors, eh? – [realized] two
correlative moments that constituted Baroque music, and that is the discovery of harmony
by accords with all the meaning that this revealed to us, that is, the internal components,
obviously, the internal components of the resonant body, [Pause], and on the other hand,
without this… the other strictly complementary aspect, a new organization (machination)
of voices and instruments, or if you prefer then philosophically, a new organization of

                                                                                             17

souls and bodies. And what would this mean? What this would mean is it occurs to the
extent that each follows its own laws that enter into accord with the other. If you will, it’s
the idea of an autonomy of two series that is going to found the correspondence or what
Leibniz calls “assent” (consentement), and it’s starting from all this… nearly, that Leibniz
is provided absolutely with a sound (à faire rendre à Leibniz un sonore absolument).

RP: There’s a final point that seems very important to me. [Deleuze: Yes?] It’s in relation
to recent musical notions that have a total resonance with Leibniz’s philosophy. These
are, on one hand, the synthesizer that is the monad expression, I mean, of a monad. I
mean, literally, the monad synthesizer is the extant actualization of the world. And on the
other hand, [there is] another term, an apparatus, that is, a technical machine called a
harmonizer, and it’s a very, very important apparatus. Why? Because it’s an apparatus
that has existed for about a decade now and that [Pierre] Boulez uses in his latest
creations over the last four or five years. I would like to create a small schema to explain
how this functions because it reveal the virtualities of the musical world that are already
completely present in Baroque music and that shows how different worlds that are
incarnated by these different virtualities that are consonances, these veritable pluralities,
because its millions of harmonic souls that are in resonance and harmonies themselves.
There is going to be a kind of ownership, actualization by certain authors, of certain
harmonic partials (partielles), and this is going to create a technical world that is very,
very… I don’t have the exact term, but I would say modulated, right? Can I create a small
drawing to show how this functions?

Deleuze: But, certainly, certainly.

RP: This is really called a harmonizer. So I will explain. [He goes to the board and draws
a graph while speaking]

Deleuze: A simplified drawing because that’s very complex.

RP: Starting from the moment a note is emitted, whatever it might be, or an accord, there
is first going to be a temporal play on this accord, that is, this accord is deferred a fraction
of a second. It is not graspable by the ear, that is, for a thousandth of a second. And a
harmonizer generally works with two or more than two voices. So this isn’t something
dual. Starting from a unique accord that is already constituted from a plurality of notes
and thus consonances, it will give birth to a plurality of voices. And this machine, that we
can situate here, is going to process this accord in a way that causes chords preestablished to resonate by the composer and that can vary from one to the other. I will
give two examples of this, but we could imagine many. So technically, this happens
through a time lag that is not perceptible to the ear because it’s a lag on the order of a
hundredth or a thousandth of seconds, called a “delay” in English. And from this accord,
I am going to be able to have, for example, here a fifth and there a third – it’s the same
for a note – so I can have consonances of consonances. And this world, which is world of
possible virtualities, obviously a world of actualizable virtuality, is actualizable according
to the desire… according to the laws of composition that the composer will have applied.
So these are in themselves ghosts of sounds, but that are going to be able to be actualized
at one moment or another in a way of coming to resonate between here and here [RP

                                                                                                         18

points to his drawing], on a plane that is virtual and that passes into actuality through the
operation of the machine and the desires of the composer, or that is going to resonate
with the bass accord or the bass consonances, or all three at the same time, in which we
can imagine about ten or a hundred sounds that themselves are already complex, that
resonate simultaneously in a kind of continuous world, the world of the composition and
of the pre-established harmony. And this is how today we have a technical answer to the
“great laws”, in quotes, that had…

Deleuze: Into the game… Yes, because I was telling you one day, understand, that God
made the world by playing, this is a very interesting idea that runs through all philosophy
and that began very early on, but what’s important is to know what the kind of game is.
The idea could mean, and it’s not the same idea as long as one hasn’t stated what kind of
game it is. We saw this all too briefly because, there again, we are in a review of another
study, that we would have to study very, very closely what Leibniz presents as the “game
of God” when he created the world, and what little we did see, it was extremely complex,
that it was a kind of game that wasn’t at all the same as Heraclitus’s game or Mallarmé’s
game, and that it’s a very, very special type of game. [Deleuze looks up at RP’s drawing
on the board] Here what is interesting is that the harmonizer’s game is a type of game. I
don’t at all mean that’s it’s Leibniz’s, but that is of the same family, completely of the
same family.

Listen, I would like to end like this. What I would like to tell you is two things. Next
week, as I already told you, but I insist on this because otherwise there will be lots of you
– so listen closely -- that may have some problems. Next Tuesday I will be back, but only
to see the students of first, second and third cycles concerning their personal work and
any problems they have or things for me to sign. So I will be available to them Tuesday.
So don’t forget this. On Tuesday, we will take care of all your problems for first, second
and third cycle students. So, do this, come; otherwise, I said that you can call me if you
couldn’t make it, if you have an urgent problem. It’s very important to sort out your
administrative situation. So, we have a rendezvous next Tuesday around 10 am on this
topic.

And then, the other thing is very simple. I find that this year, we have accomplished again
a rich year, and I am saying, without undue flattery on your part, that this has been
greatly thanks to you. And finally, I deeply thank those who intervened in our musical
discussion. So, I am quite pleased that it has left us, as required, with some confused
impressions. But I believe that, in any case for me, it gives me some new departure points
for work that I would not have had without this session. So, there we are, thank you very
much. [End of the recording] [1:15:18]

Notes

 In Gilles Deleuze, Félix Guattari: Intersecting Lives (Columbia University Press, 2011), François Dosse
explains that in order to consider the theme of “harmony” (also the subject of chapter 9 in The Fold),
Deleuze turns to several specialists in music, notably Pascale Criton and Vincent Valls, as well as Richard
Pinhas, hence a seminar with more interventions from the participants than was usual.

                                                                                                          19

       There are three sources for the preparation of the transcription and translation: on one hand, the two
usual audio recordings, one from Web Deleuze and the other from the BNF; and on the other hand, the
sound track from a film produced by Marielle Burkhalter presenting most of the session. As the film omits
the first twenty minutes of the session and consists essentially of the part including the invited
presentations, it thus starts in mid-discussion between Deleuze and Pascale Criton. The two recordings each
provide the entire session, on different machines, but each contain different gaps due to tape changes.
       Unfortunately, the start of Pascale Criton’s audio presentation is nearly inaudible (from 13:10 to
18:50). But when Deleuze intervenes with his first question, the end of her intervention is audible since it
overlaps with the start of the video version of this session. However, despite the presence of a film team
and their equipment (or perhaps due to this), the video is sometimes inexplicably edited, producing jumps
and holes in the film and the sound-track. Thus, this final transcript evolved starting first with the Web
Deleuze recording, then supplemented by the film’s sound track (and visual cues), and finally with
verification of the augmented transcript thanks to the BNF recording.
  The content remains barely audible in the audio recordings due to the microphone placement and ambient
noise in the room. She undertakes a succinct overview of the importance of bass and alto voices in the
evolution of harmony and accords in the Baroque period.
  Since some segments from the session have been edited in the film (hence, creating gaps in the sound
track), the passages transcribed from the audio version are indicated in brackets.
  Reference is perhaps to Manfred Bukofzer, Histoire de la musique baroque 1600-1750 (1982), cf. The
Fold (Columbia University Press, 1993), note 33, p. 163; Le Pli (Minuit, 1988), note 32, p. 185.
  Deleuze here seems to want to continue his discussion with Pascale Criton, without interruption.
  With Pinhas continuing to speak, Deleuze takes a resigned expression.