1

Gilles Deleuze
Seminar on Cinema: The Movement-Image
Lecture 12, 09 March 1982
Transcribed by Charles J. Stivale (Part 1, 66:20) and Nicholas Lehnebach (Part 2, 76:46);
additional revisions to the transcription by Charles J. Stivale
Translation: Graeme Thomson and Silvia Maglioni

Part 1
But I would like to know… indeed it is my most profound wish to know if there are some of you
who have anything to add or even to rework from last time. You remember… But I feel I'm missing
out all kinds of things that would lead to my making some readjustments... When you said last time
that... Oh, yes?
A student: [barely audible intervention referring to Sergei Eisenstein's film Ivan the Terrible, in
relation to the three types of any-space-whatever that Deleuze presented in the previous session and
to the filmmaker's cinematic interplay between several types of windows, including those of a
cathedral].
Deleuze: Ah... there would be the three? I don't remember...
The student: There is a text by Eisenstein that has been completely forgotten, which I think would
be interesting, where he differentiates between the darkness of the cathedral and the cathedral in
darkness.
Deleuze: Oh yes, that's interesting... Yes, yes.
The student: Eisenstein elaborates a whole passage on this difference between the darkness of the
cathedral and the cathedral in darkness... [Indistinct remarks]
Deleuze: Ah, he says this regarding Ivan the Terrible? Ah, that would work for me... that would
work for me perfectly.
The student: It's all the more interesting because at the end of Ivan the Terrible, [inaudible]... and
immediately afterwards there's the murder in the cathedral where it switches back to black and
white1, and it’s regarding the relationship between these two sequences, the continuation of the
color in black and white, that he differentiates between the darkened cathedral and… [inaudible]
Deleuze: That's very interesting. And what you have written about Straub's spaces... it wouldn’t be
possible to make someone who hasn't seen his films, such as myself, feel that. It goes too much with
actually seeing the films.
The student: [Short answer, inaudible]
Deleuze: But among the films that are regularly shown, there are some where these hollowed out...
these emptied spaces, appear.
The student: Yes, like in Moses and Aaron...2
Deleuze: So, in Moses and Aaron you have this? For those who like horror films, I just want to
inform you that there's a classic... The Devil's Mask,3 showing at midnight in… I don't know which
cinema. It's a film by Bava, a very fine film, very fine… Yes, Pascal Auger, you were saying when I
was talking about Snow's Wavelength last time, you said that after all The Central Region is
constructed in the same way.
Pascal Auger: [Inaudible response referring to the movement of the camera in The Central Region
in relation to the constitution of any-space-whatever]

                                                                                                            2

Deleuze: I saw that they were going to screen The Central Region at Beaubourg… next week, I
think. Well, if no one has anything else to add... so, we must continue. Now you see that we have
made some progress because... Yes? Sorry, I can't hear very well.
Georges Comtesse: [Hardly audible question about what Deleuze said during the previous session
about Wim Wenders’ cinema, about empty and emptied out spaces, and his cinema as a cinema of
fear. Remarks about the coldness and indifference of some of Wenders’ characters, a kind of
anesthetic effect in the regime of their affects as well as a dimension of aphasia in their speech]
Deleuze: Yes, yes, quite, I would almost say that this regime of affect that you describe in such an
intriguing way, this regime of affect implies that these are no longer affection-images and that we
have passed into another regime of affect. This notion of anaesthesia seems a very accurate
description in this case. I'd like to go back to the question you asked before, at the level of another
type of image, because indeed, another type of image can include elements of affect, but when what
you call anaesthesia occurs, these are elements that must be related to a different type of image,
which is no longer the affection-image. But I'll keep it in mind because I'm sure it'll come back in
some way.
So, you see, the perception-image was something we covered as best we could, always with the
possibility of adding all kinds of things. It's really like a drawer. We've also covered the affectionimage as far as we were able, and with the affection-image we limited ourselves to drawing out the
notion of affect – since last time I tried to explain what this equivalence consisted of – or of powerquality. And finally, if I sum up in a few words... our analysis of the affection-image, it amounts to
saying: well, the affection-image is either the power-quality expressed by a face or a close-up, or
the power-quality exposed or revealed in an any-space-whatever. So that it would be like an
outstretched pole, right?
Now, the third type of movement-image, which we're only just making a start with today, though
perhaps we won’t really be able to get started on it – and you'll soon see why – namely the actionimage. For affects, or if you prefer, power-qualities... don't they possess yet another level, don't they
possess a further level than... than either being exposed in any-space-whatever, or being expressed
in a close-up? If they have... They obviously do have, right away one would say they have a third
level. The third level is actually the shortest level, you could even say the most ordinary level. It's
very rare that power-qualities reveal themselves in an any-space-whatever. Just as it's very rare, or
quite rare in any case, that they are expressed in a close-up or in a face. But what is the normal state
of these power-qualities? What is their normal state? They are actualized in a state of things. They
are actualized in a state of things.
What is a state of things? Well, it's a set of real connections between objects and persons, between
objects, subjects... When I say, "this table is white," I take the quality "white" as something
actualized in a state of things. So, let's look for an example that suits us. I'll go back to a case I've
mentioned before. When Ivens4 calls one of his films Rain5, it is rain filmed from all points of view,
in any-space-whatever, rain that is not even here and now. It really is an any-space-whatever. Yet it
is not the concept of rain; it is a singular rain. More than this, it's the conjunction – it's not a general
idea of rain – it is, to use the terminology I employed last time, the virtual conjunction of all the
different kinds of rain... the virtual conjunction of all singular “rains”. And it's not a concept.
Okay... let's jump now to another image: a rainy day in northern Italy, and a character's wanderings
in this Italian rain. We all know these celebrated images by Antonioni. This rain... we have the
impression that it has never begun and that it will never end.6 But this doesn't mean it isn't
completely different from Ivens’ image. In this case, the rain-affect is not related to an any-spacewhatever. It is related to a perfectly determined space, an extremely determined space, a determined
state of things. That day, it's raining. And I can extend that day... again it's a kind of rain... I have the
impression this rain will never end. That doesn't mean that the affect, the power-quality, the
raininess isn't actualized this time in a state of things. Well, that's not complicated… it's really quite

                                                                                                             3

simple.
But I would say this that should interest us because it is here that the action-image begins... this is
where the action-image begins, that is, when power-qualities can be considered as actualized in
such and such a determined space... in an individual... individuated state of things. So, you see how
last time, in terms of terminology, just so as not to get confused, I felt it was important to
distinguish the singularity of an affect from the individuation of a state of affairs. The singularity of
an affect is this white, this yellow, while the individuation of a state of things is... this table in which
this particular white is actualized. It's not at all the same thing. So, at least, it's like we're... it's...
because each time I'd like you to sense when we have a need to pass on... it's like we're forced to
pass on now. Examining the action-image is a question of whether the action-image has begun,
from the moment when the power-qualities – and this would be the first, though I'm not saying it's
the final definition of the action-image – but the first definition of the action-image, the one we start
from, is when power-qualities are actualized in an individuated state of things within a given
determined space.
If this passage occurs, it doesn't prevent us from... What can we draw from this? Well, on the one
hand, it seems to me that we're a little bit behind because we still have this question of powerqualities or pure affect to deal with, and we have a vague presentiment perhaps that... We can see
what region it fits into. Yet for my part, I'm still not fully satisfied, since we haven't yet given it an
adequately precise status. And on the other hand, we're already rushing towards the action-image.
We've seen where it begins, but we still lack guidelines.
So, I was thinking how I'm a bit wary of applying philosophy to cinema. Which is why we'll do the
opposite. To get out of this transition, the transition towards the action-image, I would like to begin
today with an interlude that will require all your patience, and that consists in seeing whether... So,
at this point, are there no philosophers who might have something to tell us about... about what? I'll
say right away that what I'm expecting, what I'm expecting in a way is the possibility of classifying
the poles better, the possible poles of the action-image. So, this is like an interlude because what I
want to do... what I want to start with today is like an interim state between the affection-image and
the action-image. And these two philosophers seem to me very, very interesting. One good thing
they have in common is the fact that they are not much read, the first because no-one reads him
anymore and he is considered a bit passé, and the second because he is not well known in France.
At the same time, they are small marvels because they discover things.
They're so good at finding... When you find something in philosophy, all philosophers agree on
what it means to invent something in philosophy, the way in which a philosopher really contributes
something new. They all say – and this isn't linked to a doctrine – they all say, you understand, the
first act of invention when you do philosophy is when you manage to make new cuts. That's how
they define their invention. I mean, from Plato to Bergson it's like that. They say, well yes, you're
doing philosophy, that is to say, you're in the process and you've already partly invented a concept
when, for whatever reasons you're able to state, you group things that we usually separate and you
separate things that we usually group. That is, you discover new articulations.
Plato, in a famous text from Phaedrus, explains that the philosopher can only be compared to a
cook: he discovers the articulations of reality. And the first discovery of the articulations of reality
is that the matter is never clear. There are animals whose articulations are obvious, visible; there are
others whose articulations are secret. Anyone who has cut up an animal knows this. For example,
the chicken is a ridiculous animal because its joints are visible and common. The duck is a superior
beast because its joints are secret, so deeply buried, so paradoxically distributed, that finding the
joint of the bone becomes a kind of inventive art, and there are surely beasts even better than the
duck. But in the end... [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]
Now, this is what philosophers do: they cut up the real. And the first act of cutting up the real will
lead them to say, no, you thought that such and such a thing seemed to be this other thing, but it's

                                                                                                           4

not the case. That's not the way it goes. And they redistribute. And you will find this metaphor of
the taken up many centuries later by Bergson who says, well yes, to do philosophy is to cut up
reality, to discover, and we can only cut up reality if we have discovered its articulations. And the
articulations of reality are never given. What goes with what? What goes with what? I mean the
lines of articulation, to trace the lines... well.
So the two philosophers I want to talk to you about for reasons... and again this is why I’ll need
your patience, because the reason I'm speaking about these philosophers will only emerge as we
proceed. One is called Maine de Biran, and he lived – I've taken the dates from the Larousse to give
you an idea – he lived from 1766 to 1824.7 And this is an author who took up a lot of space in
philosophy textbooks in France for a very, very long time before he fell into a kind of oblivion, so
he's not read much anymore. It's very difficult to find his books now, yet at the same time, he's
someone quite prodigious, formidable, amazing even.8
And then, the other one I would like to speak to you about is from the Anglophone world… I think
he is quite well known in England, although in France not may have heard of him… a man called
Peirce, spelled P.E.I.R.C.E.9 Peirce published very little during his lifetime – he lived from 18391914 – and he is important because he is the founder and creator of a discipline that was to develop
and have enormous consequences for the whole of contemporary thought, namely he invented what
he called semiotics. He invented semiotics, and he wrote a lot, but published very little, it was only
after his death that an edition of his works was published, in England, an edition in about seven or
eight volumes. In France, there isn't much available, except for one excellent collection, Peirce.
Ecrits sur le signe, by someone for whom it was clearly his life's work, Gérard Deledalle, published
by Seuil. It's a sort of selected essays, but it's very well done, a very intelligent selection of pieces.
Good. So, let's proceed.
Well, Maine de Biran – and this is why he's famous, and why he was so present in all the
textbooks... He was famous for an apparently very simple operation which consisted in having said
that Descartes' "I think", his cogito, must in fact be understood as an "I want". Ah yes, well, the "I
think" is an "I want". Therefore, it's a kind of philosophy of the will that he was trying to substitute
for so-called classical philosophy, which was above all a philosophy of understanding. But what
does this mean? It is, in other words, through the experience of the will that the self is constituted
and that consciousness is discovered. So, you see how this represents a shift from an "I think" to an
"I want".
But what does Maine de Biran intend by this "I want"? The "I want" is obviously – and de Biran is a
very fascinating character, he's probably the first philosopher, though we don't know for sure, to
have kept a kind of diary of his own states of being. It is certain that he suffered from a malady,
Maine de Biran's malady was at the same time a radical absence of will and an extreme
hypochondria. And so, this philosopher who was a timid man, who had difficulty in wanting
anything, said: the primitive fact of thought is an "I want" and not an "I think", the primitive fact of
consciousness, rather.
And indeed, what did he call this "I want"? Because, if you know a little bit of philosophy, you'll
see there are other philosophers who have forged a philosophy of the will, but not one like Maine de
Biran’s. What does he call "I want"? What he calls "I want" is already, it seems to me, something
very interesting: it's a relation. It is not a term. And in fact he will say that Descartes' error is to have
conceived of his "I think" as a substance: “I am a thinking thing”. He conceived the "I think" as a
substance, whereas "I think" should have been conceived as a relation, and in particular a relation
that implies the "I want".
But what kind of relation does this "I want" imply? The relation of a force to a resistance. The
relation of a force to a resistance... In other words, the "I want" is felt in the experience or feeling of
effort. Effort is the correlation of a force and a resistance. What does he mean here? Does he mean I
want this particular thing and it is reality that necessarily resists me? No, that's not what he means.

                                                                                                          5

He doesn't mean resistance in the sense of, for example… [Deleuze knocks on the table] the table
resists me. He's not interested in speaking about the resistance of things. Why not? Because the
resistance of things is secondary. A thing resists me only insofar as I give myself a goal. And what
goal? So, I can say, well the world is against me. But Maine de Biran, with his "I want", has
considered, and claims to extract, a sort of phenomenon of want that is completely independent of a
particular goal. What he seeks is a kind of pure "I want". And if the pure "I want" is the relation of a
force to a resistance, it cannot be the resistance of something to my will, because something resists
my will only insofar as my will already proposes... my will already proposes a particular goal. So
that's not what he means.
And in fact, what he draws out as the primitive fact of consciousness... well what does it relate to?
Effort, or force… resistance of what? A resistance that is purely muscular. This is where we find the
bottomless pit of hypochondria. I want to raise my arm. You see how this is a pure, abstract
example, independent of any goal. We imagine Maine de Biran thinking, I want to raise my arm,
and he feels that this is a task, and what is more a task that is infinite. Oh, how exhausting it is. The
relation that he is unveiling is a "force" that he will call the hyperorganic force, muscular resistance
or inertia. And it is this relation that constitutes the voluntary effort, that is, for him, the new form of
the "I think". You see that the effort, the feeling of effort – which is to say this new form of "I think"
– is constituted by two terms in reciprocal presupposition, and he insists enormously on this point,
two terms in reciprocal presupposition, namely: the hyperorganic force exerted on the muscle and
the muscle that resists, that opposes its inertia.
Just accept this for now... don't tell me if you agree or not; let yourself drift, let yourself drift,
because all this is nonetheless very interesting. First of all, it's a very new way of thinking. Once
again, what is already very significant from the point of view of logic is that he is telling us that the
primitive fact is a relation. Don't look for the primitive fact in a term, since this upturns, it upturns
much of the philosophy of the 17th century. The philosophy of the 17th century still clung to the
notion of substance. It's not that they're wrong. I'm not trying to establish who's right or wrong. I'm
trying to draw out certain meanings. Maine de Biran was, to the best of my knowledge, the first to
say, no, if you're looking for a primitive fact à la Descartes, you will not find it in a substance, you
will only find it in a relation. Good.
So, what else is new? There is a lot that is new if you understand this experience of effort,
hyperorganic force, muscular inertia. So, there are two terms in reciprocal presupposition, and this,
according to Maine de Biran, will be the fact of consciousness, what he will call the primitive fact.
The primitive fact is a relation.
You see what this changes, and perhaps if you reflect upon it, those who are interested, you won't be
surprised that Maine de Biran is known through a kind of revival, one which is fairly recent but
through what intermediary? Through the intermediary of French phenomenology. In particular,
Merleau-Ponty, towards the end of his life, made a curious return to Maine de Biran and gave some
very interesting lectures on his work. What could be of interest to a phenomenologist in this matter
of Maine de Biran? It's that the cogito, the "I think", was directly related to the body, and this is
very important with regard to 17th century philosophy... and that here, there was fundamentally a
relation of the will with the body and of force with resistance that in fact prefigured what would be
the demands of a concrete phenomenology. Okay.
For the moment I retain just this, you see how in this primitive fact, this primitive fact of the self or
of consciousness, Maine de Biran never ceases telling us that in the primitive fact, there is not, as
Descartes believed, one substance; there are in fact two terms in relation; there are two, there are
two… [Interruption of the recording] [36:38]
… So, what do we call this? Let's look for a word. Perhaps we could say that it's the domain of
secondness. This is the domain of secondness. Okay. And indeed, this rather strange term,
secondness, is a term created by Peirce, who was a great enthusiast of new words. But to designate

                                                                                                       6

what? To designate a special category, which he claims to be the domain of Maine de Biran.
Secondness is the category of all sets, of all beings, of all things, of all phenomena in which two
terms can and must be distinguished, two terms in relation with one another. And Peirce will say
much later, ah yes, Maine de Biran discovered something very profound, namely that the real, or the
experience of the real implied this secondness, that is, this relation between force and resistance.
And indeed, it's curious that... the English rarely read the French. One wonders how Peirce chanced
upon Maine de Biran's writings. Anyway…
Let's get back to Maine de Biran. Fine, you see that what we have here is this two-term relation that
marks the emergence of the self or of self-consciousness. But what was there before? What was
there before? It doesn't begin just like that. Self-consciousness, the self or self-consciousness, is
already a very evolved state of the world. And so, yes, before there was something. And in a book
with a rather splendid title, Mémoire sur la décomposition de la pensée (Essay on the
Decomposition of Thought) – alas, here decomposition doesn't refer to physical decomposition, it
means logical decomposition, but the title is beautiful in any case… In Mémoire sur la
décomposition de la pensée, Maine de Biran will explain what there is before, before his primitive
fact, before the relation of two terms, before the experience of effort, that is to say, before the
discovery of the self in the form of two terms in reciprocal presupposition, resistance-force, forceresistance.
What is there before? Well, he says, before, there is sensation or affection. Before, there is sensation
or affection. And this is no longer the domain of the will, it's no longer... And his question is: what
does sensation or affection consist in? And he says, well, you know, sensation or affection has two
aspects. Any affection, any sensation, always has these two aspects, which are more or less in
variable proportions, a passive aspect and a motor aspect. Motor. We should be wary of this term.
We are before the primitive fact with its two terms. So, this is not a matter of voluntary motor
functions. What he obviously means is that every sensation, every affection has two aspects, one
passive, the other involuntary motor, in the sense of an involuntary motor function, and he will
attempt to demonstrate this for every sense organ.
So, take touch, well yes, touch, there are passive affections of touch, something is hard. But, at the
same time, the hand or the paw, the paw is animated by movements. So here it's clear that in tactile
sensations, one can distinguish, I mean in tactile affections one can distinguish between involuntary
motor functions and passive affections. It's the same thing for the eye: a passive affection of the
eye, would be, for example, a light... a light. You see that it is not a question of perception. It's
actually a luminous affection. It's not a matter of perception. You can guess why: because
perception is something that comes from and depends on the primitive fact of consciousness. Here,
what we have are pure sensations, luminous sensations. Well, there is an involuntary motor function
of the eye too: the eye moves, it turns, if you turn the light on suddenly, the eye looks towards the
light, or follows the light, in short, you have a whole involuntary motor function of the eye’s
movement.
And then he considers sensations pertaining to the sense of smell. At first glance, the sense of smell
seems more complicated. The sense of smell seems more complicated because we can clearly see
how there are passive sensations and passive affections but there is not much mobility. The nose
doesn't move that much, it's not like the eye. Also, it has... yes, I mean, there are some beasts, are
some animals whose nose moves, but not much. And in any case, he has no need of this because he
has an excellent idea, which forms part of a new distribution of things, and its author is Maine de
Biran. He says that involuntary mobility which corresponds to an organ of the senses is something
we are not necessarily led to find in the organ itself because what is the true involuntary motor
function corresponding to the sense of smell? It's breathing. I don't know why this idea makes me
so happy, that is, I have the impression... it's like when you read... I have the impression that he's
grasped something. It's like when you read a novel and you say, ah yes, there he really got it! And
so breathing would be... and in fact when I experience an affection of smell, I feel it like that. And

                                                                                                           7

then I go back to... [Deleuze breathes very hard]. It's with the whole of my breathing that I try to
isolate it... Good.
One last effort, Maine de Biran: the ear. Taste is a fairly simple matter. You can locate taste, but the
ear. Again, the ear doesn't move much, even less so. And here too, he has a great idea. He asks what
would be the involuntary motor function that corresponds to the passive affections of the ear. It's the
cries that I utter. It is the cries that – not me, because there is no me – but it's the cry that the animal
itself utters. It is the cries that the animal itself utters, which are the true involuntary motor
functions to which the passive affections of hearing correspond. The cries that I utter are like autoaffections. So in each case of affection, he will show both the passive aspect and the involuntary
motor aspect. And this allows him to solve a problem – I'm trying to speed this up because I'm...
because I really enjoy telling you this... you have to take it as a story, a nice little story.
This is why... it's that it allows him to solve a very important problem: which is: how can the
primitive fact, the experience of effort, that is, self-consciousness, arise? The primitive fact is
indeed voluntary effort, the "I want" with its two terms, hyperorganic force and organic resistance.
But how will this be able to emerge in the world of nature? Well, it's that the voluntary effort will be
grafted onto a certain kind or number of involuntary movements. It will never merge with them,
however. Why is this? It is because involuntary movements move from the periphery to the center
while the experience of voluntary effort moves from the center to the periphery. Involuntary motor
function moves from periphery to center, whereas voluntary motor function moves from center to
periphery, according to him. But it is precisely the involuntary movements in affection that will
allow the will to take over: I want to breathe [Deleuze takes a deep breath] ah, yes... And it is on
this point that the graft will occur – you see? – it is on this point that the grafting of the domain of
voluntary effort onto animal life will take place. Clearly, this isn't an easy process, and he himself,
in his writings, says that there lies a mystery. But what allows the passage from one to the other are
these involuntary movements that will be taken up by the will.
Hi! [Interruption; voice of a student who enters. It’s Alain, from the previous week] … Hi, Alain!
You're late! It's no simple matter... it's not easy to sit close to me, you know? It's not easy!
[Laughter, noise of moving chairs] What? What's the matter? [Deleuze speaks to someone near him]
Come to me, come to me... No, you can pass that way... and go out that way…
Alain: [He makes an announcement regarding an event that will take place at the La Borde clinic,
mentioning the participation of Félix Guattari]
Deleuze: You're done, eh? There… there you go! [Alain starts talking again briefly; we hear
Deleuze laughing] No, you reassure her; you just tell her: no, no, not now. You tell her there's no
hurry. [Pause] Well, you see, that's how it is... [Everyone continues to chat and laugh]
So, this is the involuntary motor function on which the will grafts itself, taking it up and reversing
its sense… since, once again, it will no longer move from periphery to center but from center to
periphery. This leads us to the side of the primitive fact, that is, the relation between the two terms.
But if I take affection in itself, affection for itself, what is it exactly? It will either be a purely
passive affection - this smell, this light, what Maine de Biran calls a simple affection – or it will be
a purely involuntary movement within the body, and this is what de Biran will call an impersonal
affection.
Now the status of these affections is very interesting, these pure affections whether simple or
impersonal, because first of all they have no relation to a self. They have no relation to a self. The
experience of the self and the arising of the self only occur in the two-term relation with voluntary
effort. So, on their own, the affections have no relation to a self. Then what type are they? Not at all
"I feel". The "I feel" is still in relation to a self. They necessarily belong to a completely different
category. They are of the type: "there is". There is yellow, there is light, there is this or that of a
quality, thus without attributable relations to a self.

                                                                                                           8

And the second and more profound characteristic would be that there is no attributable relation to a
space or to a time. They are not in space or in time. Why? Because the construction of space and
time itself derives from voluntary effort, and in Maine de Biran, as I recall, there is a very beautiful
passage where he makes a reproach – I mention this for those who know a little about this stuff –
where he makes a very interesting, very curious reproach to Kant. He says that what Kant missed is
that he has always spoken to us about sensation and the sensible already caught up in the forms of
space and time, already seized by the forms of space and time, whereas simple affection – Maine de
Biran says – is outside of any relation to space and time; it cannot be located as such.
So you see: no relation to a self, no relation to space and time, no relation to perception since
perception too implies an “I myself”. So what is it? In which cases is it found? Ultimately, it's an
abstraction in relation to our life because, in fact, when you give yourself a self, when you already
have a well-constituted self or even a barely constituted one, well, you perceive qualities, affections,
you perceive them. They are grasped... you can locate them in space and time. So, for him, reaching
simple or impersonal affection constitutes a kind of abstraction. And yet there are states that come
strangely close to it.
And these states that he will list and which will be an important part of his diary, where he makes
some descriptions that are very unusual for the time, highly meticulous descriptions, first of all
there is sleep. In sleep, yes, there you have experiences, types of affection that are pure, impersonal
and that cannot be located. Even in optics, in optics you have glows, but glows that aren't localized,
for example, this could be with colors, not in sleep, but in other cases, you can experience colors
that are not localized. What does that mean? There is yellow, a kind of atmospheric yellow, which
you can't place. It is neither here nor there. It is not like the yellow of an object, it is not a yellow
object.
Let's look at a later text, but it doesn't matter, a declaration of feelings of unreality. This is a child, a
child during break time. All of a sudden, “it seemed to me that I no longer recognized the school.”
She recognized the school earlier. It was part of... a consequence of the "I want", of voluntary effort.
You will see why. She experienced a lack of perception which stemmed from the strength-resistance
correlation. And you understand that Maine de Biran will build the whole feeling of reality from
this force-resistance correlation. So, when the little girl perceives the school, everything is fine, she
is in that two-pole world of force-resistance from which the sense of reality stems. Then, all of a
sudden, “it seemed to me that I no longer recognized the school. It had become as large as a
barracks" – which in effect means that it has become impossible to locate – and “the singing
children” – it seemed – “were prisoners compelled to sing. It was as though the school and the
children's song were set apart from the rest of the world. At the same time my eye encountered a
field of wheat whose limits I could not see. And this dazzling yellow immensity, bound to the song
of the children imprisoned in the smooth stone school-barracks, filled me with such anxiety that I
broke into sobs.” This sort of yellow space which would suddenly only exist outside of all spacetime… Then, “I ran home to our garden and began to play to make things seem as they usually
were.” 10 We see very clearly, how she throws herself into action – action being the domain of forceresistance – she throws herself into action to bring back the real. So, with this small action, she
begins to run, she begins to run to get back to reality. Why? To return to the world of effortresistance.
So, in the experience the little girl recounts, at first, she recognizes the school. It's the world of
perception that derives from the self. Everything is fine. But then it collapses. And what is she
thrown into? Into the world of pure affection, the world of simple affection. There is some yellow.
there is some yellow, but where, when? We don't know, it can't be located, it is unrelated to space
and time; a feeling of anguish and then she returns to the world of effort-resistance to reconstitute
the real. Thanks to a little run. Good.
Here's another example that Maine de Biran talks about that interested him greatly: he said that in
cases of hemiplegia – you see how he was seeking out a whole frontier of pathological cases, he

                                                                                                         9

mentions many pathological cases in his explanations of pure affections… He explores a number of
cases of hemiplegia, you know, when you have a paralysis on one side of the body. If you squeeze –
here we have some examples from doctors, some quite odd texts from doctors, if we can call them
that, from his own time – he squeezes the hand of a hemiplegic, and he squeezes it very, very hard,
and the hemiplegic feels the pressure in the paralyzed limb; he feels it, he even feels pain. But it's a
pain – and the hemiplegic's formulations are very eloquent on this point, almost as good as those of
the little girl in the schoolyard – it's a pain that can't be located. And the difference... the sensation
of pressure on a working limb, even there it's not perfectly localized, it's, ah yes, you're pressing on
my right hand. But, for a hemiplegic, if you press very hard on his paralyzed hand, he will have a
sensation, but this time it won't be in the form of a perception that can be located, it will be in the
form of simple affection, in the form of simple affection outside of any relation to space-time and
outside of any relation to a self. Again, this is the world of "there is" – there is some red, there is
pressure, there is, there is... And as opposed to the experience of effort, which you remember and I
repeat, is constituted by a correlation, by a reciprocal presupposition of two terms: effort-resistance,
what about pure affection, what will that be? It is not a relation; it will be what Maine de Biran will
refer to as an absolute existence, the absolute existence of the “there is”.
[Sound of a student getting up. It’s Alain]
Deleuze: You're leaving?
Alain: Yes, I'm going.
Deleuze: If you don't get into the German course... I think it's very useful, especially if you've taken
anything, it would be very useful for you to walk... to walk. So here... Yes, yes… No, that's not why.
It's that you have to... it's walking that'll make you feel better. [Alain says something] Yes, a long
time ago, yes, it's wonderful, Mediterranée…11 It's beautiful, have you seen it? Go on, go for a
walk, you can have a little run in the corridors. [Alain seems to invite him to his place for dinner]
Oh, I never go out at night. [Laughs; Alain continues to talk] We'll have a party! And Félix… Okay,
but call him first. [Pause; Alain continues] Yes, yes, but have a walk anyway. Walk. There you go...
He was right. [Alain says "Ciao" and apologizes for having interrupted the class] Goodbye, you'll
be okay. Goodbye... [Pause] Listen, these are all adventures.
Yes... absolute feeling of existence. You see how it's as if he had cut into the experience – this is
what interests me – it's as if he had cut into the experience and separated out two domains...
reproaching others for mixing them up. He separated the domain of simple affections, which he will
define as absolute feelings of existence. No relation to a self or a personality; no relation to space
and time; outside of spatio-temporal coordinates. And on the other hand, we have – what should we
call it? The feeling of relation as it appears in voluntary effort, the relation or correlation of two
terms that do not exist independently of one another, force and resistance, that is, the category of the
relative to which the self belongs and from which derive: space and time, the categories of
knowledge, and the forms of perception.
 In other words, if I defined as “secondness” that sphere of relation from which derive the sense of
reality, action, perception, self-consciousness and so on, the first sphere of pure, impersonal
affection could be called “firstness”. And indeed, Peirce, again taking inspiration from Maine de
Biran and quoting him, gives the name “firstness” to the realm of simple or pure affections. Good.
You will say to me, how does this help us? But here I can add another element to the end of our
affection-images. I would say that the whole matter of the affection-image, as we defined it, that is
affects exposed in any-space-whatever or expressed by a face – you remember what we discovered
about the close-up, that it has nothing at all to do with a partial object... a close-up simply extracts
what it presents from all spatio-temporal coordinates – I could say, if you like, with all due
conceptual rigour, well yes, the affection-image is firstness. It's this domain of the “there is”, of the
absolute feeling of existence and so on. So, what will the action-image be? You can guess: the
action-image will be secondness... [Interruption of the recording] [1:06:20]

                                                                                                        10

Part 2
... as it appears in the privileged example: "force-resistance", or "effort-resistance", these two terms.
And two things must be said about secondness, namely that it is called secondness because it comes
after firstness, but also because it in itself consists of two terms... Where there is an action-image, or
where, I would also say, you have a feeling of reality, there are "two". You might tell me we haven't
made much progress. But let's go on searching for what could help us.
Peirce, for his part, will construct a whole system. Let's suppose – we're done with Maine de Biran,
I didn't say much about Maine de Biran, just what was needed – Let's suppose that now we make...
that now we consider Peirce's system. Peirce will distribute the whole of what appears, the whole
set of phenomena into three categories. And Peirce's three main categories, which are very unusual
at first glance, though we're now a little better equipped to understand them, are: firstness,
secondness and thirdness.
He says everything that appears, and he calls this "phenomenological categories", or as he employs
more and more complex terms – and he really adores creating words, which is his right after all –
"phaneroscopic categories", but phaneron in Greek is the same thing as phenomenon so... let's call
them phenomenological categories. And everything that appears will therefore be either a
phenomenon of firstness or a phenomenon of secondness or a phenomenon of thirdness.
Well then, let's have a dig. What, but why should we care about all this? Why should we care? I'm
not just trying to make the time pass, that would be a terrible idea. So why recount all this? It's as if
by chance... we can't suspect Eisenstein of having read Maine de Biran, although he read a lot.
In an interesting text from a book by Eisenstein, Nonindifferent Nature12, which we'll have to speak
more about later… Nonindifferent Nature, Eisenstein tells us more or less the following... –
[Interruption by a student] What? -- … He tells us more or less the following. He says, there are
some very strange states that one goes through. They are pure affections, and these states of pure
affection, it's as if we can only grasp them to the extent – it can be something very simple – but it's
as if they place us outside of ourselves, as if there is a rupture with the relation to the self. And he
says: this is what I call... he finds a concept of his own, which I hope will be interesting for us... he
says: this is what I call ecstasy or the very depths of pathos.13
Ecstasy is not at all of the type, "I see this", but rather "there is". Ecstasy is never, and he goes so
far as to quote both medical and mystical texts, all of which works for us. Maine de Biran also
alluded to mystical texts. The mystic does not begin by saying, "I see God," which would be a
proposition his pride, or rather his humility, would find unbearable. He does not say "I see God" or
"I see Christ," he says "There is the deity," that is, he sees nothing at all, he experiences an affect, he
experiences a pure affect without relation to the self and without relation to space and time. And
here Eisenstein tells us: this is what I call pathos, once it’s been established that, and it can even be
the extreme of pathos, once it’s been established that pathos is indeed the movement of being
outside of oneself.
And he tells us, if there is one thing in the world that is supra-historical, it is that. That is what is
supra-historical, and you can see that this world of pathos will cover many things since he ends his
text by giving hunger as an example. He says: there aren't a number of ways of being hungry
according to the epoch. Hunger is exactly what Maine de Biran would call an impersonal affection,
a feeling of hunger that can no longer even be considered in the form of "I am hungry", but simply
that "there is hunger". Pure impersonal affect that can no longer even be localized in space and time,
and which indeed... [Deleuze does not finish the sentence]
And Eisenstein – and this interests me because it's very odd – Eisenstein constructs his categories
and proposes a set of categories where on the one hand we have the sphere of pathos, made up of
simple affections in the mode of "there is", absolute feelings, absolute feelings of entity – here one
would find all the various entities I was trying to speak about last time – that are supra-historical,

                                                                                                       11

outside of space and time and which he will distinguish from the historical world or the world of
action, which, for its part, is a world with spatio-temporal coordinates and individuals who are
specific to a given epoch or determined by a given epoch and so on. But here you see these two
spheres which correspond exactly to firstness and secondness. And then, well... it would be
interesting to look more closely at this text.
So, Eisenstein says... he makes a violent attack on religion because he says...look, this is the fault of
religion. Mysticism is nothing, because mystics are very precise. They say, there is something
divine, we could call it the presence of a power-quality. Well, yes, that's very good, says Eisenstein.
But the operation of the church, in Eisenstein's view, is precisely to relate these states of simple
affection to spatio-temporal coordinates, to a whole mechanism of causes, to various "selves", and
to say that this is the proof of the existence of God and so on. So, he says, here we have an
operation that completely disfigures pathos. You see, there's a big correspondence there, I mean, it's
the same story I'm telling without... it's not that I'm trying to establish an arbitrary connection
between texts, but it seems to me quite amazing that there is this correspondence.
And if I were to look for another correspondence... I find myself thinking, well, it's odd, this is a
theme that has always obsessed Godard. And Godard is just like Eisenstein in that he's someone
who reads a lot, a lot, he's read a lot, but I would be surprised, I don't know why, I don't know why,
I would be surprised if he had read Peirce. Now, many of you know with what persistence, through
all his different phases, Godard has used and reworked a theme that could be summarized... a
theme that closely relates to his conception of cinema images and that can be brought down to the
formula: 1, 2, 3… 1, 2, 3. And I say through his different phases because in each phase it has taken
on a quite different meaning, though, to the best of my knowledge, it has always returned in
Godard's thinking as an obsessive theme, a kind of key to understanding the cinema image.
And the theme of 1, 2, 3... I think one of the first times it appears, quite explicitly is in connection
with Two or Three Things I Know About Her… is that the title? Two or Three Things I Know About
Her.14 Yes, that's it... But then, during his Vertov period,15 the 1, 2, 3 resurfaces and takes on a
different meaning. And later, in Here and Elsewhere16, it takes on what seems to me yet another
meaning. In the TV programmes, the 1, 2, 3 will come back in full force taking on a further
meaning still.17 And obviously it's not because he says 1, 2, 3 that he's a Hegelian or a Marxist, no. I
mean, Hegelians too say 1, 2, 3 but it would be offensive to Hegel and his followers to think that
this is sufficient to define a Hegelian. There are people who say 1, 2, 3 who are not at all Hegelian,
it all depends on how you conceive the 1, 2, 3… So, when Godard says 1, 2, 3, he believes he's
conveying a really profound message about the nature of cinema images. And I'm thinking to
myself, we're going to get to this story in the end, but for now we're just at the beginning.
So, there would be images of firstness, images of secondness, and, Peirce tells us, images of
thirdness. We're now beginning to able to deal with the first two types of images: those of firstness
and secondness. But we're still not managing very well. So let's now consider Peirce. What I'd like
is for you to sense how much we’re going to need Peirce. Here's how he defines firstness,
secondness, and so on. None of this is particularly difficult, right? It may be boring but it's not
difficult.
A student: It's not boring at all!
Deleuze: “Firstness is the mode of being which consists in its subject’s being... such as it is.” He
weighs his words, he's one of those thinkers who always weigh each word… “Firstness is the mode
of being which consists in its subject’s being positively such as it is regardless of aught else.”18
Now, we understand why it's called firstness… it's what is "one". But what is "one" exactly? Well,
"one" is what is positively such as it is and without reference to anything else. I'm sure you want an
example, so let's think of one right away. I say: red. Red, everyone understands me. Well, I say
"red". This word refers to something that is as it is, "red", positively and without reference to
anything else.

                                                                                                           12

"Secondness is the mode of being...”
A student: But when you say red, it's... [Inaudible]
Deleuze: When we say "the red" because there it is a word, and a word is obviously a thirdness, but
what the word designates... Try it by abstracting it and you'll tell me... oh, that poses a series of
problems, but you'll see what he's getting at, eh, you'll see what he's getting at. Yes, that, uh, your
remark is quite correct, it goes without saying that if you take into account the word "red"... but I
can do without it, I could do without it. You follow my finger, but my finger introduces a relation,
but that's because I'm trying to speak, to speak to you, so this is secondness at least. But, if I'm in
red, say I have, I have a red flash in my eye when I fall asleep, it happens sometimes, a red flash,
red, I don't tell anyone that there is, there is red. There is red in my eye, but I don't say it, I don't say
anything, there is red. Well, it's a quality such as it is, positively and without reference to anything
else. You'll say to me, "But yes, it's in reference to your eye". No, it's not in reference to my eye. It
will be if I introduce where this red comes from, if I pose the question of its cause. But here, not at
all, I'm just like a cow with, ah... ah... [Laughter] a cow that says to itself, "Ah! There's some
green". The cow doesn't say, "There's grass". "There's grass", that would already be secondness.
"There's some green "... and this is a cow that wouldn't eat, since eating would be an action. Okay.
Secondness is “a mode of being of one thing which consists in how a second object is.” You'll say
it's self-evident, but it's not at all self-evident. "Secondness is a mode of being of one thing which
consists in how a second object is” but without consideration of a third, whatever it may be. You
feel how everything that is real, everything that you experience as real, is secondness. Forceresistance, action-reaction. Secondness refers to all forms of duel/dual. Wherever there is a
duel/dual, there is secondness. And all the phenomena that derive from any duel/dual... actionreaction, force-resistance, and many others... refer to this category of secondness.
Thirdness, then, that as far as I know has no equivalent in Maine de Biran... “Thirdness is the mode
of being which consists in its subject’s being such as it is in placing a second and a third in
reciprocal relation”. That is, there is thirdness every time we have mediation, every time there is
mediation, to use another word, each time there is law or possibility of law. Each time there is law
or possibility of law... haven't I said too much because in a duel/dual, uh, in secondness...
[Interruption of the recording] [1:22:41]
... boiling water, I want to boil some water so I put it on the stove. I boil it. I wait. Now, I'm using
this example to distribute the three categories in the way Peirce does. Suppose it has boiled, and
then I dip my finger in it while it is boiling. I scream, the pain is so great that it's no longer a local
pain, it's really a case of "there is a boiling", pure affection. I don't know where I am anymore, I've
been sprayed out of space and time, under the pain, this pure affection. Oh no... it's not even me that
hurts anymore, it's the world that hurts, so I'd say this is what firstness is.
There is indeed a law according to which water boils; this law, you realise, is a mediation. It's a
mediation between water and heat such that the heat must reach 100 degrees for the water to boil.
Here 100 degrees is the legal mediation. I would say, this is the number of thirdness. You have three
terms. A first term, a second term, a mediation that relates one to two. What he says is quite simple,
yet it seems to me very... it's... English philosophers always proceed in this manner. They're dealing
with perfectly simple things that they cut up in such a twisted way, in a way that's so bizarre you
have the impression they're speaking to you from another planet, and this is how they build their
concepts. It's very, very odd; only the English know how to pull these stunts... well, that's thirdness.
But when I want to boil some water, what am I doing? Well, it's a force-resistance relation. You'll
tell me there's a law. Of course, there is a law, but the law has nothing to do with the fact that I want
to boil water. What is the law? It is the statement of the possibility of bringing, and I mean the
possibility, of bringing water to the boil. A law is always, as they say in learned terms, hypotheticaldeductive. It's hypothetical and is expressed in the form: if you bring water to 100 degrees, it will
boil. Okay, so if I bring the water to 100 degrees, it will boil, this is the domain of thirdness.

                                                                                                           13

So when I want to boil water, it's not in the name of the law, it's in the name of what? It's in the
name of a phenomenon of secondness, namely: me, the goal I set for myself, and this is done in a
world of secondness, meaning my effort: I have to fill the pot, I have to carry it, I have to put it on
the stove... and, resistance. What is the resistance to my effort in this case? As Bergson said on
another occasion, you have to wait for sugar to melt, you have to wait for water to boil. It is the
form of inertia and resistance that opposes my effort. When you want to boil water, you are in the
world of secondness, although the law in the name of which the water boils is part of thirdness. Do
you understand?
This has to be very concrete, it has to radically change the way you understand things. The ideal is
that you will never boil water in the same way again, [Laughter] now that things are distributed in a
different manner. This is Peirce's world. It's a very odd world, very intriguing, very...
Well, of course actions and reactions respond to laws. Yes, they respond to laws, but not as actual,
not in their realities. They respond to laws in what makes them possible, and what makes them
possible is the phenomena of thirdness. But in themselves what we have is pure... it's pure
secondness... actuality itself is pure secondness. Okay?
So, regarding this, if you have a vague understanding of this first difference between firstness,
secondness and thirdness, [Peirce] will, in certain texts – because, we will realise that, in fact, things
are much more complicated than this – in certain texts, he will say, well, generally speaking, to
firstness, secondness, and thirdness correspond three types of sign. And for my part I would say –
and the difference, it seems to me, is very minimal – they correspond to three types of image. There
are images of firstness, and what shall we call these images of firstness? To keep it simple – I mean,
this isn't the final form of Peirce's thought, though he passes through it – we shall call them icons.
They are icons.
And what is an icon, in fact? It is a sign that signals according to what it is. Only in terms of what it
is. It is a sign of firstness. It is a sign that signals according to what it is. We call this an icon. Okay.
A sign of secondness... is a sign that signals in function of something else that exists, something else
that is actual. It's an actual sign that signals in function of something else that is actual. There has to
be two. We shall call such a sign an index. For example: no smoke without fire. Smoke signals in
relation to something else that is actual, even if it's not given... there must be fire, I see smoke,
there's no smoke without fire, well... smoke is the index of a fire. The index will be the sign of
secondness. Action-reaction... I'd say a barometer – actually, come to think of it we could do the
Highway Code like this, we could, you'll see... but let's not complicate things. So, there are signs of
secondness, signs of firstness, and there are signs of thirdness.
A sign of thirdness is what [Peirce] will call a symbol. A symbol is a sign that unites two things by
means of a mediation. This is the world of signification because, according to Peirce, there is no
mediation that unites two things independently of a signification. It's the signification that is the
mediation itself… Well, it doesn't matter for now, all this would be rather complicated...
Now I would say this can help us clarify our terminology a little. I would say that affection-images
are icons, that's fine, everything we saw regarding the close-up and so on, and the implication is that
he gives us something much more than words, which will help us progress. And the signs of the
action-image are indices. So, I say 1, 2. And when I say 1, 2, it will mean that I place an icon here
and an index there, because I remind you that 2 is not only what comes after 1. 2 is in itself and by
itself 2, and if 2 comes after 1, it's because 1 is in itself 1, firstness and 2 is in itself 2, secondness.
So I say... I say 1 and then I say 2, and then if I dare I say 3 but am I mistaken or am I not mistaken
when I say 3. Is there is something in the cinema that would be thirdness?
This is no small matter. What does Godard mean when he says 1, 2 and then 3? Without knowing it,
without meaning to be, perhaps he is Peirce's purest disciple. But we haven't got there yet, for the
moment we just have to keep in mind: image of firstness or icon... or affection-image. Action-image

                                                                                                           14

equals index or image of secondness.
So, can we elaborate this a little here... or should I just finish with Peirce. Yes, yes... because next
time we won't be able to. So, let's go back to this, we mustn't give up as long as there's still
something obscure.
Firstness, as Peirce defines it, is actually very, very complicated. It's so complicated for the mind to
that you have to... you have to try to sense what he means. I have the impression that at times he too
cannot express himself. There is indeed – and it's not surprising – something ineffable about
firstness. As soon as you use words, we're already in thirdness. At the very least, with thirdness we
can sense what secondness is, but it's not easy to get to pure firstness.
But he tries, so he creates a language for himself. He tries, and one of his most satisfying formulas
is: "Firstness is what there is of immediate and instantaneous consciousness in consciousness as a
whole”. But be careful, no consciousness is immediate and instantaneous. There is no immediate
and instantaneous consciousness that is actually given as fact, for a simple reason. The fact is the
domain of secondness. There is no fact except in terms of a relation between two things.
So, the formula he uses becomes something quite bizarre. Which is why you either have to stick to
the letter of it or else forget it completely: “What there is of immediate and instantaneous
consciousness in all consciousness, even if no consciousness is immediate and instantaneous”.
Okay, this is not contradictory; no consciousness is immediate and instantaneous, yet there is an
immediate and instantaneous consciousness at work in all consciousness. You just have to scratch
hard to get it out. So what is this immediate and instantaneous consciousness that is present in all
consciousness?
Let's take an example that he takes himself, "red". This is the example he takes, "red" as pure
affection. For the little girl at school, we saw earlier, it was "yellow". It could be hunger, it could be
hunger, because I begin with one of the most beautiful of Peirce's texts, when he's trying to give us
a vague understanding of what firstness is, he gives a list of dream examples ... where is it? If I can't
find it will be catastrophic! Obviously, I’ve lost the page... Ah, here it is!
"Among..." – this will give you an example of his style – “Among phanerons” – which is to say,
among phenomena – “Among phanerons there are certain qualities of feeling, such as the color of
magenta, the odor of attar, the sound of a railway whistle, the taste of quinine, the quality of the
emotion upon contemplating a fine mathematical demonstration, the quality of feeling of love,
etc.”19 He tells us that these are all qualities, and that qualities equate to firstness. You see that this
is already something huge. It cannot be actual, since actuality is always the relation between an
action and a reaction, it's always the relation between force and resistance. So firstness, according to
Peirce, will be pure qualities or pure powers. He himself employs the word potentiality. These are
qualities or potentialities...
Well, they are qualities or potentialities, which suits us well. What were we dreaming, what better
dream could we have? A philosopher who discovered everything regarding the nature of the
affection-image, such as we were seeking. And this can be the whistle of locomotives, it can be
quinine, it can be love, it can be hunger, thirst... It covers more or less all of Maine de Biran's pure
affections and impersonal affections.
But then you might say, in what way is it not actual? What does this mean? Let's go back to the
example of "red". You can perceive red, it's a mode of consciousness, the perception of red. Here it
is actual, we are in secondness. When you perceive a red object, you are fully in secondness,
perceiving subject-perceived object, action-reaction, effort-resistance, as you prefer, you are in
secondness, you are in relation. Thirdness is mediation, secondness is relation.
Okay. When you can remember red – "Ah, I remember, he was wearing his nice red suit!" – or
when I say, “Ah yes, yesterday, she had on her nice red skirt…” You see I'm making my examples
more and more tempting, that way you'll follow me better. "Ah, yes! She had her red skirt on…" Or

                                                                                                        15

I can imagine red... “There I think I see red...” I say, “Ah yes, I'm making... I'm making a picture,
yes, I see red... I think I see red..." Well... I can do all of that.
But firstness is not in any of its modes of consciousness. It is neither red as perceived, nor red as
imagined, nor red as remembered. So, what is it? It's what is immediate and instantaneous in all
these modes of consciousness. So, what would that be? What is immediate and instantaneous in all
these modes of consciousness? In perception, imagination and memory, which are not, themselves,
immediate and instantaneous. Yet it's a great idea. I think here Peirce proposes a status of the
sensible that is quite fantastic. He says, well yes, it's not difficult to understand. He says – here he
assumes a tone that is more... this is a great, delirious philosophy, and the further he goes, the more
he takes up familiar examples. He says there are some very strange people who think that when an
object is in the dark... that when a red object is in the dark, it stops being red. He says it's an odd
idea they have, he says, well if that’s the way they live then they're not much good for my
categories. Because, of course, when an object is in the dark, it stops being actually red. Fine. In
fact, there is no more secondness in the dark, there is no more secondness. But the red doesn't stop,
it doesn't stop at all. Why?
Suppose I say, "She's not wearing red" or “She's not in red”... My consciousness of red as
immediate and instantaneous consciousness is no less positive in the phrase "She's not in red" than
in the formula "Oh, she's put on her beautiful red dress". The red that is not actual, that is not
actualized, is no less red than the red that is caught up in an actuality, that is, in a secondness. And
insofar as red is a firstness, it has nothing to do with the question: Is it or is it not actualized?
Alain [back in the room]: [Inaudible remarks]
Deleuze: Oh well, that's very good, you are… Well, very well then? You see, everything is okay,
everything is fine… [Alain continues] Okay... All right, fine, everything's fine... Just like you said...
[Alain leaves] Goodbye!
Yes, you see this business of... do you feel any of this? You have to try to feel something, yes. I say
it's not red. Well, this "It's not red" is an immediate presentation of red equal to that of the
proposition "It's red". From then on, it's clear that red as a pure quality is either a potentiality or a
power-quality.
And there's another English philosopher that fascinates me, who I wanted to talk about earlier, but I
gave up on it because I'm already behind on everything, but I've alluded to him several times, who
is Whitehead.20 Whitehead got along very badly with Peirce, they despised each other... the English
are very... that's just the way it is, that's life, but Peirce thought that Russel and Whitehead didn't
amount to much, and yet Russel and Whitehead gave him a lot… but that's okay.
It's nonetheless amazing. Whitehead, who for me is as great a philosopher as Peirce, develops a
whole thesis on what he calls “eternal objects”.21 And he makes a distinction between eternal
objects and prehensions. And he says that the eternal object, the eternal object is a pure virtuality, a
potentiality. And when does it become actual? It become actual when it is realized in a prehension –
that is, in an act of perception, if you will, in an act of appropriation, or let's just say of perception.
And then he asks, what is the eternal object in itself? There are all kinds, as there are in Peirce, but
one type of eternal object is qualities, pure qualities, "red", and I remember a very eloquent page of
Whitehead where he considers blue as an eternal object.22
So secondness is when potentiality is actualized in a state of things. You can see that we're
beginning to sketch out our action-image. The affection-image is the power-quality in itself, that is
to say, in the words of this marvelous formula – I can't imagine a more beautiful formula – once
again: "What there is of immediate and instantaneous consciousness… in all consciousness which is
not immediate and instantaneous.” That's my affection-images, the icons.
So I was asking, what else is there besides the two types of icons? Because I would distinguish two
types of icons, icons of expression and icons... this is what it would be... I would say, there are icons

                                                                                                            16

of expression and icons of exposition, in accordance with my two types of affection-image. And
what else can happen to a power-quality other than its exposition or expression? Firstness.
Exposition or expression is firstness. Well, there's only one thing that can happen to an icon: to
become actual. The power-quality is actualized in a determined state of things, in a determined
space-time, in an individuated state of things. At that point the icon is no longer an icon, at that
point the icon has become an index. An index of what? An index of the state of things. You have an
action-image. Already you have an action-image. Okay.
Thirdness, for the moment, I will leave thirdness aside. Are there any images of thirdness? For the
moment, we've seen how thirdness is what brings the future into play. Here If I do this, I will obtain
that through the intermediary of a mediation or a law – mediation, law or signification. Well then,
let's finish with Peirce.
So there you have your three things: firstness, secondness, thirdness. Where it gets complicated –
because it can't stay like that, we've got off to too good a start, it's much too good a start – so what's
going to complicate all this? Here I'm going fast because I really want to get this done today. So…
No, I'm not going to try to explain why this problem will arise.
But what arises here is the notion of the sign, since there are indeed signs of firstness, signs of
secondness, signs of thirdness. And Peirce will realize that what we call a sign has three aspects.
Not only are there signs of firstness – which are icons – signs of secondness – which are indices –
and signs of thirdness – which are symbols – but any sign whatsoever has itself three aspects.
First aspect, let's say – I'm oversimplifying – but let's say, the sign in itself. The sign in itself. He
calls it by a rather barbaric name: the representamen. It doesn't matter. It's the sign in itself.
Second aspect: the sign in relation to an object for which it stands. In fact, a sign is something that
stands for something else. "To stand for" is the vague expression we use to describe the way a sign
operates. So, there is the sign in itself, and secondly, there is the sign in relation to the object it
stands for.
Thirdly, there is the sign in relation to what he calls the interpretant. And this too is a very complex
notion. What is the object? The object is not necessarily a real object. You can have a sign for an
object that does not exist. What's more, you can have a sign designating an object that cannot exist.
So, it's not necessarily the real object. And the interpretant is clearly not the one who interprets the
sign. What Peirce calls the interpretant would be other signs that together with the first sign form a
series, according to which the meaning of the sign will be completed, developed or determined. The
interpreter, I repeat, is a set of signs or a series of signs connected to the first sign in such a way that
they develop, complete or determine its signification, the signification of the first sign.
To give you a simple example, I say the word grenade...23 and Peirce will say, using a very abstract,
an extremely obscure formula that in the end, the interpretant is habit. There isn't a single English
philosopher who doesn't bring in the notion of habit at some point. For them, it's a substitute for...
it's the best concept they come up with. But the conception of habit they develop is literally
incredible, it's extremely odd and really quite beautiful. I think it should be translated more as... for
those of you who have studied Latin, I think it's much closer to what the Latins called habitus, that
is, the mode of being, mode of being.
So I say the word grenade, I say the word grenade… Grenade, well, it's a sign. It's a sign. But what
is it a sign of? First series of interpretants: a city in Spain. I would say: city and Spain are the
interpretants of Granada from that point of view. Right? But if I say: pull out the pin, explode,
boom, then that's another thing, it's another series of interpretants. In this case grenade is no longer
a sign for the Spanish city but a sign for a weapon of war. There would be a third series:
pomegranate, tree, plant… Is it a tree or a plant? I think it's a tree, with fruit and so on. Well, you
can always make up series of interpretants like that. So that's the third aspect of the sign.
So, to finish… because I have the feeling you're exhausted… we're going to look at a very, very

                                                                                                             17

strange chart. We're going to see a chart. I don't have time right now to go to the blackboard, so you
have to try to visualize it. If I had a sheet of paper, in the horizontal, there, I would put – you see,
you can follow my finger – I would divide into three columns, but I would leave some space on the
left, and I would make three columns, beginning from the middle of the page. First column:
Firstness. Second column: Secondness. Third column: Thirdness. And then, vertically, in the
margin, I would put my three aspects of the sign: sign in itself, sign in relation to its object, sign in
relation to its interpretant. Let's do a quick calculation… that will give me how many signs? How
many basic signs? Nine. And I want to give you the list because it's so charming, you can use it for
everything, understand, and then we'll be able to combine all this, but we'll stop there.
First aspect of the sign: the sign itself. So, in the firstness column, we will have the qualisigns, q-ua-l-i-s-i-g-n-s. Qualisign… what does this mean? It's a quality that signals. It's a quality that
signals.
Sign of secondness, this is what he calls a sinsign, s-i-n plus sign. A sinsign. Why does he call it
that? The sinsign is a sign that functions in a state of things, in a singular state of things. It's the
prefix of singular that he has taken. He says singular whereas I would prefer to say individuated
since I used singularity in the case of firstness, but it doesn't matter. That is to say, in this case the
sinsign is indeed a sign, but this time it's an existence that is the sign. It's no longer a quality or
potentiality; it's an existence that is the sign.
Sign of thirdness, what he calls a legisign. Legisign. This time, it's a law that is the sign.
In relation to the object: sign of firstness: icon. Indeed, an icon will be defined as follows: It is a
sign that refers to the object through the qualities that are proper to it as sign. It is a sign that refers
to the object through qualities that are its own. For example: resemblance. An icon is something that
resembles, and its resemblance is a quality that is proper to it.
Regarding secondness: index, which, to be more precise, Peirce will define as follows: It is a sign
that refers to the object insofar as it is affected by that object.
Sign of thirdness: symbol. This time it is a sign that refers to the object by virtue of a law or habit.
Lastly, in relation to the interpretant: sign of firstness: what he calls the rheme. R-h-e-m-e. It's a sign
which, he says, is for its interpretant a sign of possibility, and it's the equivalent in formal logic of
what we call a term.
Sign of secondness: this is what he calls the dicisign. D-i-c-i-sign. The dicisign that responds to
what in formal logic is called a proposition. This time, it's a sign that for its interpretant is a sign of
real existence.
Sign of thirdness: what he calls an argument. Argument. And... and this is... and this time it's a sign
of law, and it corresponds, to what in formal logic we call a reasoning.
Okay. If it amuses you, this is a practical exercise. You see that you can combine these nine types of
signs. You'll have understood everything about Peirce when you no longer have to refer to his own
charts – he made charts all his life, continually reworking them, adding more and more to the point
of becoming completely crazy. But, already with your nine signs, you have permissible
combinations and impermissible combinations.
To give you an example: can I speak of an indexical qualisign? And that opens up a very odd kind
of formal logic, it opens up a formal logic of a very new type that will constitute a whole aspect of
what he refers to as a semiotic. Can we speak of a rhematic symbol? Can you speak of a rhematic
symbol? You sense how, in the combinations, there are incompossibilities, there are
incompatibilities and there are compatibilities. ... Yes?
A woman student: [Inaudible question]
Deleuze: A qualisign? A qualisign... well, it's a sign that signals. No, sorry! [Laughter] It's a quality

                                                                                                          18

that signals. Red, you take red as a sign. When a particular quality is taken as a sign, I would almost
say it's an aspect of a red traffic light. When I was talking about the Highway Code, it would be
very interesting to take the different signs of the Highway Code and see in which of Peirce's
categories they belong. Red-green. Here, we have pure qualities that signal. They're not just
qualisigns because, in reality, they're also indices and so on. But if you say: of these red and green
traffic lights, I retain only this aspect, separate from the others, then red is a sign and green is a sign,
and there you have a qualisign...
The same student: [Inaudible question]
Deleuze: What? A scream. I'd prefer a scream, a scream. A scream is an index, first of all. An
onomatopoeia, in my view... yes, you're right, an onomatopoeia is an icon. It's not a qualisign; it's an
icon because an onomatopoeia refers to the second aspect of the sign, the rapport it has with an
object? Because otherwise you wouldn't be able to tell an onomatopoeia from a simple noise. But if
you're speaking about a noise that signals, yes that's a qualisign...
Student: [Inaudible question]
Deleuze: A sign by definition is something that refers to something else and that has interpretants
that develop in other signs. Every sign unites these three aspects, but it's a legitimate abstraction to
say: I will start by considering the sign in itself insofar as it is itself something, and then I will
consider it insofar as it refers to something else, and then I will consider it insofar as it has
interpretants. Needless to say, every sign... So that there are no qualisigns that are only qualisigns,
or perhaps there are, but these would be extraordinary cases. For example, I imagine a qualisign that
is only a qualisign, there I would say it's an effect. I fall asleep, and I see what are called entoptic
phenomena.
Notice that if I have a red glow in my eye, and I say to myself, oh no, I have an artery that just
burst, then it's no longer a qualisign, it's not a qualisign at all, but an entoptic glow, though it's close
to being qualisign. You'll never find a pure example; you'll simply have a prevalence of this or that.
So. I'm almost done. What should we retain in all of this? Why did I... why did I tell you all this?
Well, you understand, because now that gets us off the blocks. I think we needed a boost and I think
that philosophy gives us that kind of boost, you know? And why? Because once again I'm
concerned with isolating the exact moment when we can abstractly get started with the actionimage. That is to say, the third type of image. I know where it starts, but I also know that we're
going to have some serious problems.
I would say that the action-image itself isn't difficult, once again it begins from the moment – and
here I weigh my words – when we pass from qualisigns to sinsigns. For – and here for the sake of
convenience I go back to my terminology – I will call sinsign... I myself will call sinsigns powerqualities as performed in an individuated state of things, that is to say, as performed in a determined
space-time. And what do we have at that point? We have: actual world or – for the moment we can
treat all this as equivalent, though we'll see that this is perhaps not the case – or milieu, or situation.
How is the actual world, milieu or situation defined? Well, it's the effectuation of power-qualities in
states of things.
And what about the action-image? What is its movement? It goes from situation to action; it goes
from milieu to behaviour. Am I saying too much? Why not the other way around? I don't know. It
operates sweeping up the whole domain of secondness. But that means this is going to be a vast
domain. Don't you realize how vast it is going to be?
A student: [Inaudible question]
Deleuze: The sinsign? Oh dear, it's, it's... it's a state of things or a space-time determined by the fact
that it actualizes power-qualities. That’s what it is, isn’t it?
So, this is going to be a huge program, that's why the action-image... yet maybe not more than... the

                                                                                                                       19

action-image you understand? We're going to have to, what are we up against? What will be its
milieus, its worlds? And then, how will actions derive from the situations of these milieus and
worlds?
We could almost take up a first formula. What is it? First formula of the action-image in cinema. S
(situation) – A (action) – S prime (new situation): S-A-S'... [Interruption of the recording] [2:09:19]
... actualized in a given state of things. What is action? Let's look, let's look quickly here, while
Peirce is giving us a push. I would say that action is the duel. Action is always the relation of actionreaction, force-resistance. It's the duel. Right, so I have a situation, which is a sinsign, an action
which is a duel, and a reaction upon the situation which is modified by the duel. This is interesting,
but why is it interesting? I suppose, but we'll talk about it later, it's for... before I collapse, it's...
There is a law, there is a law that had been identified, it should be called Bazin's law in homage to
André Bazin. What is Bazin's law? It's in the articles that had a lot of impact whose focus was on
the subject of “forbidden montage." There are cases where editing is prohibited. And next time we'll
look at Bazin's texts on this question. 24 Well, it doesn't seem difficult to me to understand the cases
where editing is prohibited and the cases where editing is allowed or even recommended. Editing is
absolutely necessary in any presentation of world, milieu and situation in cinema where we have an
action-image. Editing is strictly forbidden and must be prohibited when the action that derives from
the situation is narrowed down to a duel. Because here, you must have a single shot that unites the
two terms of the action.
But, the duel-action reacts upon the S-A-S' situation. Why not the other way around? Why don't we
have an inverse type of action-image, which would do the opposite? A-S-A', Action- SituationOther Action? Are these the same type of action-images? Would it be the same directors, the same
cinematic geniuses who have been particularly successful in the S- A-S' path who have also
succeeded in the A-S- A' path? Is it that the different genres are related to one of these two paths? I
mean, does the Western belong to such and such a side? And what about burlesque comedy,
American burlesque comedy? These will be huge problems for us.
So, for the moment let's just keep this in mind: the action-image will be the image that in all
possible ways, captures the situations and duels in a given set, that is, the situation being the
effectuation of a power-quality in a state of things, with the duel being the path by means of which
the situation develops.
Good. So, we can get started on the action-image next week. [End of recording] [2:13:11]

                                    Firstness                  Secondness                 Thirdness

Sign in itself                      Qualisign                  Sinsign                    Legisign

Sign vis-à-vis object               Icon                       Index                      Symbol

Sign vis-à-vis interpretant         Rheme                      Dicisign                   Argument

Notes
  The student is referring to the second part of Eisenstein's Ivan the Terrible – Part I, which was released in 1944. Part
II, though it was completed in 1946, was only released 12 years later in 1958, as it had been banned by Stalin who was
not happy with the way Ivan was depicted. This part contained a number of sequences in colour. Eisenstein had planned

                                                                                                                         20

to shoot a third part to complete the story but filming was halted with the banning of Part II. Following Eisenstein's
death in 1948, a large part of what had been shot for the final film was destroyed.
  Moses and Aron (Orig. Moses und Aron, 1975) is a film by Jean-Marie Straub and Danièle Huillet based on Arnold
Schoenberg's unfinished opera of the same name. The film, which was shot in Italy and Egypt with the singers’ parts
recorded in direct sound, retains the opera's unfinished structure, with the third act consisting of a sequence shot without
music in which Moses delivers a monologue drawn from Schoenberg's own notes.
  Deleuze mistakes the French title of Bava's film, which is in fact Le Masque du Demon (Orig. La maschera del
demonio, Eng. Black Sunday, 1960).
  Joris Ivens (1898-1989) is considered one of the pioneers of documentary cinema. A lifelong communist and antifascist, his films confronted worker exploitation and western imperialism and celebrated workers' movements allover
the world. Among his best-known films are Rain (1929), Misère au Borinage (1934), A Valparaiso (1937), 17th
Parallel: Vietnam in War (1968), How Yukon Moved the Mountains (1976) and A Tale of the Wind (1988).
  Rain (orig. Regen, 1929) is a short documentary film co-directed by Joris Ivens and Mannus Franken about a rain
shower in Amsterdam. Considered by many a masterpiece of Dutch avant-garde cinema, it is an impressionist and
lyrical example of a “city symphony” that organizes urban images according to musical guidelines by combining
experimental, documentary and narrative techniques. During the rain shower, the city becomes a screen that Ivens’s
camera uncovers and doubles.
  Here Deleuze is most likely referring to The Cry (Orig. Il Grido, 1957), starring Steve Cochran, Alida Valli, Betsy
Blair, and Dorian Gray, in which the protagonist is a man who wanders aimlessly, drifting away from his northern
Italian hometown and from the woman he loved and becoming emotionally distant and socially lethargic.
  François-Pierre-Gontier de Biran (1766–1824), known as Maine de Biran, was a French philosopher. Although he was
described by Henry Bergson as the greatest French philosopher since the Seventeenth Century, Biran’s work has
received scant attention from American and English scholars. Biran was concerned to present the case for an
Empiricism that did not try to explain away either inner or outer experience, but which saw both as equally necessary
for a doctrine of the source of human knowledge. Deleuze mentions Maine de Biran briefly in The Movement-Image,
pp. 98-99.
  The only book-length publication of Maine de Biran's work currently available in English is The Relationship between
the Physical and the Moral in Man, edited and translated by Darian Meacham and Joseph Spadola, London, Oxford,
New York, New Delhi, Sydney: Bloomsbury Academic, 2016.
  Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914) was an American philosopher, logician, mathematician and scientist who is
sometimes considered the father of Semiotics. Peirce proposed a theory of signs that played a key role in pragmatist
philosophy and served as a foundation for the theory of thought and action. According to him, meaning is non-existent
if there is no sign pointing to another sign. In other words, there is no meaning which does not generate signs from
signs, in long chains distributed over time in a certain direction (semiosis).
    See Autobiography of a Schizophrenic Girl, (Trans. Grace Rubin-Rabson) New York: Grune & Stratton, 1951, p.21
(Translation modified).
    Mediterranée (1963) is an experimental essay film by Jean-Daniel Pollet with a script by Phillipe Sollers.
    Sergei Eisenstein, Nonindifferent Nature (trans. Herbert Marshall), Cambridge, New York, Melbourne: Cambridge
UP, 1987.
    Here we translate “pathétique” with “pathos” (the term consistently used in Herbert Marshall's translation of
Eisentsein's Nonindifferent Nature) also in order to avoid the derogatory connotations the word “pathetic” has acquired
in English. It should be noted, however, that Cinema I: The Movement-Image retains the use of “pathetic”.
    Two or Three Things I Know About Her (Orig. Deux ou trois choses que je sais d'elle, 1967) is a film by Jean-Luc
Godard – the second in a series after Masculin féminin (1966) – that takes the apparent form of sociological
investigation. It stars Marina Vlady as a “typical” Parisian housewife and mother from the emerging urban middle
classes who relieves her boredom and supplements her spending power through occasional forays into prostitution. The
“Her” of the title conflates the investigation into the woman's life with that into the changing cityscape of Paris caught
in the throes of capitalist modernization.
    Here Deleuze is referring to the years of the Dziga Vertov Group, when following the 1968 uprisings, Godard
renounced his authorial signature to make a series of collective films partly inspired by Maoist revolutionary thought.
His main partner in this venture was Jean-Pierre Gorin, a former student of marxist philosopher Louis Althusser.
Together they made a series of overtly political yet ludic films, mixing elements of documentary, essay and fiction,
beginning with A Film Like Any Other (Orig. Un film comme les autres, 1968) followed by British Sounds (1968), Wind
from the East (Orig. Vent d'est, 1969), Pravda (1969), Struggles in Italy (Orig. Lotte in Italia, 1970), Vladimir and Rosa
(1971), Tout va bien (1972) and Letter to Jane (1972).
    Here and Elsewhere (Orig. Ici et ailleurs, 1974), the first film Godard made with his partner Anne-Marie Miéville,
takes up rushes from the Dziga Vertov Group's aborted attempt to make a film on the Palestinian struggle (Jusqu'a la
victoire) and weaves it into a critique of Godard and Gorin's methods in making the film and the ideological framework

                                                                                                                         21

of the Dziga Vertov Group as a whole.
   Godard and Miéville's formally radical television period, experimenting with the aesthetic possibilities of video,
began with Six fois deux / Sur et Sous la communication (1976), a series of six programmes, each in two parts, which
deconstruct the functioning of the media as it relates and fails to relate to the lives and problems of ordinary people.
This was followed by France / tour / détour / deux / enfants (1978, though only broadcast in 1981), which employed the
format of a TV current affairs magazine programme to explore the views of two primary schoolchildren on a number of
topics, both philosophical and political, as a prism of life and education in contemporary France. For Deleuze's
commentary on Six fois deux see Three Questions on Six times Two in Gilles Deleuze, Negotiations (trans. Martin
Goughin) New York, Chichester: Columbia UP, 1995 pp. 37-45. The entire conversation with the editors of Cahiers du
cinéma is also available on line at http://www.ocec.eu/cinemacomparativecinema/index.php/en/29-n-7-english/373three-questions-about-six-fois-deux
   See Charles Sanders Peirce, "Principles of Phenomenology" in Philosophical Writings of Peirce, Edited and selected
by Justus Buchler, New York: Dover Books, 1940.
   See Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected Papers (Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss Eds.) Cambridge MA: Harvard
UP, 1931-35 (Electronic Edition) p. 114.
Available at: https://colorysemiotica.files.wordpress.com/2014/08/peirce-collectedpapers.pdf
   Alfred North Whitehead (1861-1947) was an English mathematician and philosopher best known for his work in
mathematical logic and the philosophy of science. In collaboration with Bertrand Russell, he co-authored the landmark
three-volume Principia Mathematica (1910, 1912, 1913). He is often considered the defining figure of the philosophical
school known as process philosophy, which today has found application to a wide variety of disciplines, including
ecology, theology, education, physics, economics and psychology.
   Whitehead defines the eternal object as follows: "Any entity whose conceptual recognition does not involve a
necessary reference to any definite actual entities of the temporal world is called an eternal object”. See Alfred North
Whitehead, Process and Reality, (David Ray Griffin and Donald W. Sherburne Eds.) New York: The Free Press, 1978,
p. 44.
   See Alfred North Whitehead, The Concept of Nature, Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1920, in which several pages are
dedicated to a meditation on Cambridge blue.
   Here Deleuze plays on the polysemy of the French word grenade which means at the same time grenade,
pomegranate and the city of Granada.
   Bazin’s law is stated in the following paragraph: “If one forced oneself at this point to define the problem, it seems to
me that one could set up the following principle as a law of aesthetics. When the essence of a scene demands the
simultaneous presence of two or more factors in the action, montage is ruled out. It can reclaim its right to be used,
however, whenever the import of the action no longer depends on physical contiguity, even though this may be
implied”. Bazin goes on to give an example from Flaherty’s Nanook of the North, saying: “It is inconceivable that the
famous seal-hunt scene in Nanook should not show us hunter, hole and seal all in the same shot. It is simply a question
of respect for the spatial unity of an event at the moment when, to split it up, would change it for something real to
something imaginary.” See André Bazin, What is Cinema – Volume 1 (Trans. Hugh Gray), Berkley, Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1967, p.50.