1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Anti-Oedipus/A Thousand Plateaus, 1972-1973

Lecture 02, 26 March 1973

Transcribed by WebDeleuze

Translated by Daniel W. Smith

Dualism, Monism and Multiplicities; Desire-Pleasure-Jouissance

In the Archaeology of Knowledge, Foucault said some profound things about statements
[énoncés] that concern several domains at once, even if not at the same time. I take two very
vague examples. There is a moment in the Greek City when statements of a new type emerge,
and these statements of a new type emerge within assignable temporal arrangements, in several
domains. They can be statements concerning love, concerning marriage, concerning war, yet we
feel that there is a kind of kinship or community among these statements. We have seen certain
thinkers try to give explanations of how statements emerge in diverse domains that have this
kind of kinship. In Greece, for example, during the "hoplite" reform, new types of statements
concerning war and strategy emerge, but also new statements concerning marriage and politics.
All this, it has been said, cannot be unrelated.

There are some people who immediately say, for example, that there is a system of analogies or a
system of homologies, and that perhaps all these statements refer to a common structure. They
are called: structuralists. Others will say that these productions of statements depend on a certain
domain which is determinative in relation to the others. Such people, for example, we will call:
Marxists. Perhaps it would be better to look for something else.

There’s a book from which one can learn many things, titled Sexual Life in Ancient China [by
Robert H. van Gulik (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1961)]. This book shows clearly that manuals of love
and manuals of military strategy are indiscernible, and that new strategic and military statements
are produced at the same time as new amorous statements. That's curious. I ask myself: OK, how
can we extract ourselves, at the same time, from a structuralist vision that seeks correspondences,
analogies, and homologies, and from a Marxist vision that seeks determinants. I indeed see one
possible hypothesis, but it's so confused . . . It's perfect. It would consist in saying: at a given
moment, for reasons that, of course, must still be determined, it is as if a social space were
covered by what we would have to call an abstract machine. We would have to give a name to
this non-qualified abstract machine, a name that would mark its absence of qualification, so that
everything will be clear. We could call it -- at the same time, this abstract machine, at a given
moment, will break with the abstract machine of the preceding epochs -- in other words, it will
always be at the cutting edge [à la pointe], thus it would receive the name machinic point [pointe
machinique]. It would be the machinic point of a group or a given collectivity; it would indicate,
within a group and at a given moment, the maximum of deterritorialization as well as, and at the

                                                                                                       2

same time, its power of innovation. This is somewhat abstract at the moment, it's like algebra. It's
this abstract machine which, in conditions that will have to be determined, it's this machinic
point of deterritorialization that is reterritorialized in this or that machine, or in this or that
military machine, amorous machine, productive of new statements. This is a possible hypothesis.

I have the impression that there are things in [André] Leroi-Gourhan we could use here, we
would have to see how that works. This machinic point would indicate a kind of speed of
deterritorialization. There are systems of indices under which reterritorializations are made in
qualified machines, war machines, machines of love, machines of marriage.

Kyril Ryjik: This is your "series" [enfilades] which are taken up again in networks?

Deleuze: Ah, no, that's something else. As you sense, at bottom this is not our hypothesis. That's
because in this problem of where statements come from, what their production is related to, the
sub-jacent response will consist in answering: there are no individual statements, and this is one
of the multiple traps of psychoanalysis, which is the successor of a type of thinking which we
could call Western thought and which says that there are individual statements. And finally, the
form or logic of individual statements has been fixed by the cogito. It has been fixed by the
cogito which comprehends the production of statements from the subject, from a subject. Cogito:
this means that every statement is the production of a subject. It means that first; and second, it
means that every statement splits the subject that produces it. Lacan is the last Cartesian. Then
every statement refers to a subject, and every statement splits, cuts, separates the subject that
produces it. These are propositions that are linked up naturally, because if it is true that a
statement is produced by a subject, then for that very reason, this subject will be divided into the
subject of enunciation and the subject of the statement. This is what the literal process
[démarche] of the cogito consists of.

The process of the cogito, you recall, is: I can say "I think, therefore I am," but I can't say "I
walk, therefore I am." Descartes explains this in his Responses to Objections, in Descartes's rare
comic pages. Someone has objected, "Why don't you say 'I walk' like 'I am'?" and he says, "I
can't." That amounts to saying that "I walk" is a subject of the statement, whereas "I think" is the
subject of enunciation. [In this regard, see A Thousand Plateaus, p. 128]

Then, perhaps I'm not walking, but there's one thing I'm sure of, and that is that I'm thinking of
walking. In other words, the subject cannot produce a statement without being thereby split
[scindé] by the statement into a subject of enunciation and a subject of the statement. This
introduces the entire metaphysics of the subject into psychoanalysis. If we look closely at the
cogito. . .

A student: But there is no alterity in Descartes.

Deleuze: What is it that you are looking for? And dualism! There is a dualism at the level of
thought and the object thought. There is a dualism at the level of soul and body, there are as
many dualisms as you like. And if we ask: What is the source of all the Cartesian dualisms? -- it
lies in this scission internal to the subject, between the subjects of the statement, which allow no
conclusion, and a subject of enunciation, which is subtracted from doubt: "I think."

                                                                                                        3

In the entire series of Cartesian dualisms (soul-body, thought-extension, statement-enunciation),
the only remark and the only question is that this isn't the final aspect. The duality of subjects of
the statement and subjects of enunciation -- once again, the subjects of statements of the type "I
am walking," "I am breathing," "I imagine," and the subjects of enunciation "I think" -- Is it not
this duality that will inhabit all the dualisms of reflection and all the other dualisms of
substances, bodies, etc.?

I take up again, I'm thinking of the text where Descartes says, it may be -- I see a unicorn, or I
imagine a unicorn -- it may indeed be that the unicorn does not exist, it may very well be that the
proposition, that the statement "I see a unicorn" is false. But in return, it's true that I think I am
seeing a unicorn. At this level, a kind of disengagement of a subject of enunciation occurs, and
thereby all the subjects of possible statements. Whence he will say to you: I cannot say "I walk,
therefore I am," for from a subject of the statement, I cannot conclude a being of enunciation, or
the being of a subject of enunciation; but I can say "I think, therefore I am," because from a
subject of enunciation I can conclude the being of this subject.

Now all the dualisms of Descartes, even passion and action, depend strictly on this operation of
the cogito, which consists of relating statements to a subject of enunciation, which will
consequently split the subject in two: the subject of the statement, and the subject of enunciation.
This will be found, for example, at the Cartesian level, in the subject of the statement, which in
the end refers to the union of the soul with the body, and the subject of enunciation, which refers
to the thinking subject. When I say that, in a certain manner, psychoanalysis is the final inheritor
of Cartesianism, it is because, even looking at the cogito, it is very curious at what point it is an
Oedipal apparatus, a sublimated Oedipal apparatus. [On Descartes and the cogito, see A
Thousand Plateaus, pp. 128-129]

It could very well be that I myself, as a living being, have been made by my father and my
mother. But the fact that I think, that isn't explained by my father and mother, that's explained by
what? If we consider the cogito as a machine, we can see three great moments in it: doubt--which
is typically a type of paranoiac machine; the non-deceiving God is a miraculating [trans: reading
"miraculante" for "déraillante"] machine, and the "I think" is a celibate machine. That is the
Oedipal space of pure thought. There are Oedipuses everywhere; there are not only familial
Oedipuses, there are also scientific Oedipuses; and the philosophical Oedipus is the cogito, it is
the Oedipal machine at the level of thought. This is what one calls dualism. Dualism is what
prevents thought. Dualism always wants to deny the essence of thought, namely, that thought is a
process. And the source of dualism, it seems to me, is this type of reduction, this flattening of all
statements of thought, precisely, by this speculative, Oedipal apparatus in which the statement,
on the one hand, is related to the subject, to a subject, and on the other hand, and simultaneously,
the subject is split into a subject of the statement and the subject of enunciation. In this
perspective, the subject is rethought.

There is only one form of thought, it's the same thing: one can only think in a monistic or
pluralistic manner. The only enemy is two. Monism and pluralism: it's the same thing, because,
in a certain manner, it seems to me that every opposition, even all possibilities of oppositions
between the one and the multiple . . . This is because the source of dualism is precisely the
opposition between something that can be affirmed as one, and something that can be affirmed as

                                                                                                     4

multiple, and more precisely, what signals it as one is precisely the subject of enunciation, and
what signals it as multiple is always the subject of the statement . . . [On this same development
of the “one” and the “multiple”, see A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 32-34]

We saw last time how to bring about the suppression of the opposition between the one and the
multiple. It happens the moment the one and the multiple cease to be adjectives and give way to
the substantive: there are only multiplicities. That is to say, when the substantive "multiplicities"
takes the place of the one, of the multiple and their … [missing text, perhaps: adjectives], and at
this moment, one and multiple lose absolutely all meaning, at the same time as the subject of
enunciation and the subject of the statement. There are multiplicities, which obviously implies a
theory and practice of multiplicities. Wherever we leave the domain of multiplicities, we once
again fall into dualisms, i.e., into the domain of non-thought, we leave the domain of thought as
process.

Now to show at what point things become botched, I always think of this history of desire. What
I have been saying since the beginning amounts to saying that thinking and desiring are the same
thing. The best way to avoid seeing or to refuse to see that desire is thought, that the position of
desire in thought is a veritable process, is obviously to link desire to lack. Once desire is linked
to lack, one is immediately in the domain, one has already assumed the basis of dualism. But
today I would like to say that there are more underhanded ways of reintroducing lack into desire,
either through the Other, or through dualism. Here, so-called Western thought is constructed
from the relation between desire and pleasure, a completely rotten [pourrie] conception.

The first malediction of desire, the first malediction that weighs on desire like a Christian curse,
and goes back to the Greeks, is that desire is lack. The second malediction is: desire will be
satisfied by pleasure, or will be in an enunciable relation with jouissance. Of course, there will be
those who will tell us that these are not the same thing. Nonetheless, there is a peculiar circuit
here: desire-pleasure-jouissance. And all that, once again, is a way of cursing and liquidating
desire. [For this same sequence of maledictions, see A Thousand Plateaus, p. 154]

The idea of pleasure is a completely rotten [pourrie] idea. One only has to look at Freud's texts,
at the level of desire-pleasure, which amount to saying that desire is above all a disagreeable
tension. There are one or two texts where Freud says that, after all, perhaps there are agreeable
tensions, but again that doesn't take us very far. Broadly speaking, desire is lived as such a
disagreeable tension that -- a horrible, hideous word is required here, that's how bad this thing is
-- a discharge is necessary. And this discharge, this is what pleasure is! People will have peace,
and then, alas! desire is reborn, a new discharge will be necessary. The types of conceptions that
are called, in scholarly terms, hedonistic, namely, the search for pleasure, and the types of
mystical conceptions that curse desire, by virtue of what is fundamental in lack -- I would simply
like you to sense that, in any case, they both consider desire to be a dirty little thing that wakes us
up, and that wakes us up in the most disagreeable manner: either by putting us in relation with a
fundamental lack, which can then be assuaged by a kind of activity of discharge, and then one
will have peace, and then it will all begin over again . . . . When one introduces the notion of
jouissance into all that -- you can see I'm in the process of trying to make a circle, very muddled,
a pious circle, a religious circle of the theory of desire -- we can see to what an extent
psychoanalysis is impregnated, and how great the psychoanalytic piety is. This circle, one of its

                                                                                                       5

segments is desire-lack, another segment is pleasure-discharge, and once again, they are
completely linked.

And then I ask myself: What's wrong with Reich? There are two great errors in Reich: the first
error is dualism, then he passes to the side: it's the dualism between two economies, between a
political economy and a libidinal economy. If one speaks of a duality between two economies,
one will always be able to promise to make the connection [branchement], but the connection
will never be made. And this error of dualism has a repercussion at another level: desire is still
thought of as a lack, and thus it is still thought with pleasure, as its unit of measure. And Reich
has indeed given the word pleasure a stronger and more violent word, he calls it orgasm. His
entire conception of the orgasm, which he will try to turn against Freud, consists in pushing
desire to the limit insofar as it is linked to lack. If it cannot manage to obtain the discharge that
assuages it, it will produce what Reich calls stasis. Desire is fundamentally related to the orgasm,
and in order to relate desire to pleasure or to the orgasm, one must relate it to lack. It is exactly
the same thing. The first proposition is the inverse of the second.

If we add the third arc of the circle: desire-lack, all that always concerns desire which is directed
toward transcendence. In effect, if desire lacks something, it is like intentionality aiming at what
it lacks, it is defined as a function of transcendence, in the same way that is it measured as a
function of a unit that is not its own, which will be pleasure or the orgasm, which assures its
discharge. And, in order to close the circle, which for the moment has only two arcs -- obviously,
the theme that consists in establishing a distinction between jouissance and pleasure is very
useful. This is what will make the whole thing function together. I am thinking notably of a
distinction dear to Lacan, but I'm not familiar with it, the distinction between jouissance and
pleasure.

I recall what Barthes said about it in his last book, The Pleasure of the Text [Paris: Seuil, 1973]
where he explains it a little. He distinguishes texts of pleasure and texts of jouissance. This is
what he says about texts of pleasure: "the text that contents, fills, grants euphoria; the text that
comes from culture and does not break with it, is linked to a comfortable practice of reading.
Text of jouissance: the text that imposes a state of loss, the text that discomforts, … unsettles the
reader's historical, cultural, psychological assumptions, the consistency of his tastes, values,
memories… Now the subject who keeps the two texts in his field and in his hands the reins of
pleasure and jouissance is an anachronic subject, for he simultaneously and contradictorily
participates in the profound hedonism of all culture … and in the destruction of that culture: he
enjoys the consistency of his selfhood (that is his pleasure) and seeks its loss" -- the loss of self --
"(that is his bliss [jouissance]). He is a subject split twice over, doubly perverse." [Barthes, The
Pleasure of the Text (Hill & Wang, 1975, trans. Richard Miller, p.14; trans. modified]

Incredible. We here recover the duality of the subject of the statement, capable of pleasure, and
the subject of enunciation, deserving of jouissance. Only, just as the subject of the statement
never raises itself to the subject of enunciation, because the subject of enunciation is finally the
great signifier, it goes without saying that jouissance is impossible. This means, as Barthes is in
the process of explaining, that jouissance is in a fundamental relationship with death, so that we
can close our circle: desire-lack, desire-pleasure or orgasm, desire jouissance.

                                                                                                      6

Happily, in an even clearer text, Barthes goes so far as to say: "Is pleasure only a minor bliss? Is
bliss nothing but extreme pleasure?" No. It's not that one is stronger than the other, or the other
less strong; they differ in nature. If one says that pleasure and jouissance are "parallel forces, that
they cannot meet, and that between them is more than a struggle: an incommunication, then I
must certainly believe that history, our history, is not peacable and perhaps not even intelligent,
that the text of bliss always rises out of it like a scandal (an irregularity), that it is always the
trace of a cut, of an assertion…" [Barthes, Pleasure, p.20, trans. modified]. We could go on. . . .
What's happening here?

I'm thinking of this book on sexual life in ancient China. It recounts a strange story, in the end
we are all Chinese: in Taoism, it varies throughout the ages, in any case, the reader is struck by
the glory of the men and women in it. . . . But that's not what marks its difference from Western
thought, because, from the side of Western thought, that doesn't work more strongly; the
difference is elsewhere.

What's different is the way desire is experienced in a totally different manner: it's not related to
any transcendence, it's not related to any lack, it's not measured by any pleasure, and it's not
transcended by any jouissance, under the form or myth of the impossible. Desire is posited as a
pure process. Concretely, this means that it is not at all the orgasm; their problem is not at all the
Western problem, which is: How to extract sexuality from genitality. Their problem is: How to
extract sexuality from the orgasm? Then, broadly speaking, they say: You understand, pleasure
or orgasm, that's not the achievement of the process, it is either its interruption or its
exasperation, or the two amount to the same thing, and it's completely deplorable! No doubt, that
has to happen, but then one has to perceive these moments of suspension as veritable suspensions
that allow the process to once again be set in motion. They have a theory of female energy and
male energy, which consists in saying, broadly: female energy is inexhaustible, male energy, it's
more annoying, it's exhaustible. The problem, in any case, is that the man takes something from
the female energy which is inexhaustible, or that each takes something from the other. How can
that be done?

Flows are necessary -- and indeed this is a thought in terms of flows -- the feminine flow,
following very determined trajectories, rises up following the lines of masculine flow, along the
spinal column, to go to the brain, and that's desire in its immanence as a process. One borrows a
flow, one absorbs a flow, one defines a pure field of immanence of desire, in relation to which
pleasure, orgasm, jouissance are defined as veritable suspensions or interruptions. That is, not as
the satisfaction of desire, but as the contrary: an exasperation of the process that makes desire
come out of its own immanence, i.e., its own productivity. All this is interesting for us, to the
degree that, in this thought, desire simultaneously loses any link with lack, with pleasure or
orgasm, or with jouissance. It is conceived as the production of a flow, it defines a field of
immanence, and a field of immanence--that means a multiplicity in which, effectively, any
splitting of the subject into a subject of enunciation and a subject of the statement becomes
strictly impossible, since in our revolving machine it was very simple: the subject of enunciation
was the subject of impossible jouissance, the subject of the statement was the subject of pleasure
and of the search for pleasure, and desire-lack was the splitting of the two. That should tell you
to what degree, from Descartes to Lacan, this repugnant thought of the cogito is not only a
metaphysical thought.

                                                                                                       7

The entire history of desire -- and once again, Reich falls in the same way -- this way of linking
desire to a beyond, whether it's that of lack, or pleasure, or jouissance, and of posing the dualism
between the subject of enunciation and the subject of the statement. And it isn't by chance that
it's the same people who are doing it today, i.e., the Lacanians, i.e., engendering all statements
from the subject, which consequently, and retroactively, becomes the subject split into the
subject of enunciation and the subject of the statement. What is inscribed is the subject of
enunciation, which links desire with the impossible jouissance; the subject of the statement,
which links desire with pleasure; and the cleavage of the two subjects, which links desire with
lack or castration. And at the level of theory, the production of statements exactly covers this
rotten theory of desire, word for word.

It is in this sense that I'm saying that thought is indeed monist, in the very apprehension of the
identity of thought and process; as well as in the apprehension of the identity of process and
desire: desire as constitutive of its own field of immanence, that is, as constitutive of the
multiplicities that populate it. But all this is perhaps obscure, a monistic field is indeed a field
inhabited by multiplicities.

Ryjik: Yes, but I find that dangerous, because monism is considered to be something completely
different, like the result of a dialectic coming from dualism. Hegel, for example.

Deleuze: But that's a false monism.

This magical operation that consists in forbidding the employment of the adjectives one and
multiple, in order to retain only the substantive multiplicities. . . . This is the operation that gives
an account of the identity of monism and pluralism, and which related the true source of dualism
to the duality established between the two adjectives: the one and the multiple. The ground of
dualism has always been: there are things that are one. Here one always recovers Descartes,
because today we are talking about Descartes, i.e., Lacan. And then there are things that are
divisible. Dualism is not defined by two, dualism is defined by the employment of the one and
the multiple as adjectives. This is already true in Duns Scotus.

So that, instead of using the one and the multiple as adjectives, one substitutes the substantive
multiplicities in the form: there is nothing that is one, there is nothing that is multiple, everything
is multiplicities. At this moment, one can see the strict identity of monism and pluralism in this
form of a process of immanence which can be neither interested -- and this is what the Chinese
tell us in their sexual wisdom -- nor exasperated. The process of immanence is also a
multiplicity, i.e., to design a field of immanence populated by a multiplicity.

Ryjik: A minute ago, you spoke a dualism as a result of Oedipus. Since, on the other hand, you
think of Oedipus as a transitory machine between the affairs of the mass, the pack, or the affairs
of paranoia or schizophrenia, you thus have a production of this dualism from a dualism that is
proper to you (you don't return like that) at the level of the functioning of this process. This is
what you have been explaining for two or three years.

Deleuze: That has been over for two or three years, it's finished. Here, today, I am reintroducing
no dualism. Forget the rest.

                                                                                                       8

When I say: the cogito is Oedipal, it matters little. . . . It would be necessary to find, moreover. . .
. The first formulations of the cogito must be in Sophocles' Oedipus, even in the Cartesian texts,
this entire progression is there, the assimilation to the three stages of the Oedipal machine, with
paranoiac doubt, the non-deceiving, miraculating God, and the "I think," that appears to me to be
almost [the bachelor machine].

That is, what I mean is that any theory which, in one way or another, relates the production of
statements to a subject is firstly a theory that will necessarily divide the subject in two: the
subject of the statement and the subject of enunciation. Secondly, it will involve us in all sorts of
submissions, by telling us, in the most hypocritical manner, that you're the boss! What I would
like to make clear is this is all the same thing. And thirdly, the figures of desire, in the sense that
desire is linked to lack, or, what amounts to the same thing, desire is linked to the trinity
pleasure-orgasm-jouissance. Voilà.

Why this second point? Why this most hypocritical submission? It is because this history of the
splitting of the subject always consists in saying: it is you who command, i.e., you will accede to
the commandment to the degree that you submit yourself to a order, which you are not subject to
without also being its legislator. This is the famous order of democracy. You are a legislator
insofar as you are a subject; and it is not by chance that the person who pushed this doctrine the
farthest, the formalism of this doctrine, is the inheritor of Descartes from the viewpoint of the
cogito, namely, Kant, and that the submission to reason is presented to us as the manner in which
we become legislators. This always refers us to the division of the subject into a subject of the
statement and a subject of enunciation: you will obey as the subject of the statement, but because
it is you who command as the subject of enunciation, and we are led to grasp this great split
identity -- as a barred identity, whatever you like -- between the legislator and the subject. It's the
same thing; it's the same mechanism, which thereby claims to engender statements in relation to
a subject; which posits the duality of a subject of enunciation and a subject of the statement as
the source of all the other dualisms, which thus suppresses thought as a process; and which,
thirdly, destroys any position of desire, because by relating desire to lack, pleasure, and
jouissance, it in effect leaps in favor of the appearance of thought, i.e., in favor of an image of
thought. We could contemplate the image of thought in dualism, whereas there is no reality to
thought except in the monism of the process and in the multiplicities that populate the field of
immanence.

So that when the Chinese define this field of immanence of desire traversed by flows -- which
pursue neither the possible pleasure at the level of the subject of the statement, nor the
impossible jouissance at the level of a pseudo-subject of enunciation -- at the same time, they
give themselves all the conditions for an entire theory of desire and a theory of the production of
statements.

A final step to take: Why do they look for the theory of the production of statements in a military
art, that is, in a war machine, a strategic war machine, while at the same time looking for the
theory of desire in manuals of sexuality? The two types of manuals are strictly [missing word]
with each other. Which is to say that they define multiplicities communicating within the
process, or within the field of immanence itself.

                                                                                                       9

Ryjik: With this little difference, that the manuals of sexology are completely phallocratic and
Chinese politics is completely imperial.

Deleuze: OK, but that's a detail, because that's not what makes the difference between the East
and the West. You could say the same thing about the West; if you're looking for the difference,
it's certainly not there. That it's phallocratic and imperial, OK, but that's more the common
background. What this means is that it's not enough to define desire as a field of immanence in
order to escape imperialism, etc.

Is this clear, this relation between the theory of statements and the conception of desire? [Pause
in the session]

No one can say anything about the difference in Lacan between pleasure and jouissance?

A student: Desire entails an enunciable relation with jouissance.

Deleuze: We can see how this all takes part in the same thing. To say that jouissance is not
pleasure, that it takes part in a kind of system, which, in order to simplify it, I would present as a
circular conception of desire in which, at the bottom, there is always the same starting postulate -
- and it is true that Western philosophy has always consisted in saying: if desire exists, it is the
very sign, or the very fact, that you are lacking something.

Everything starts from that. A first welding of desire-lack is brought about; from there, it goes
without saying that desire is defined as a function of a field of transcendence; desire is desire for
what one does not have; that begins with Plato, it continues with Lacan. This is the first
malediction of desire, it's the first way to curse desire; but it is not sufficient. -- What I'm doing is
following Plato's method in the Phaedo, when he constructs a circle from arcs. --

The second arc: if desire is fundamentally aimed at an Other, open to a transcendence, if it is
subjected to this first malediction, what is it that can come to fulfil it? What can fulfil it will
never be the object toward which it tends, except in appearance, for it is the Other, it is
unattainable, is the pure transcendent. Thus, that can't be what fulfils it. What comes to fulfil it or
satisfy it, what gives it a pseudo-immanence, will be what is called a state of pleasure. But at this
second level, it's understood that this immanence is a false immanence, since desire has been
fundamentally defined in relation to a transcendence, and this fulfilment is, literally, an illusion.
Second malediction of desire: it's a matter of calming desire for a moment, and then the
malediction will begin again. And then it will be necessary to call it up again, and then it's the
conception of pleasure-discharge. This word is enough to indicate that the title of this second arc
of the circle is "To Provisionally Have Done With Desire." This is what's fascinating to me: the
point at which all this is retained in Reich's protest against Freud. He retains this conception of
desire-discharge, which he thematizes in the theory of the orgasm. This second arc clearly
defines this type of illusory immanence through which pleasure fulfils desire, that is to say, it
obliterates it for a while. But, as in any good construction -- because all this is a pure
construction -- it's not true, it's false from start to finish.

                                                                                                   10

A third arc is needed to close the circle, since you have this supposed truth of desire linked with
a transcendence of the Other, this illusion or this deception through which desire encounters
calming discharges in which it disappears, even if it reappears the next day. A third arc is needed
to give an account of this: that even through these states of sleep, satisfaction, etc., the
irreducibility of desire to states of pleasure, which only satisfy it in appearance, must be
reaffirmed, it must be reaffirmed in another mode: transcendence. And this reaffirmation is the
impossible jouissance-death relation. And from start to finish, it is the same conception. And
when someone tells us: watch out, don't confuse desire, pleasure, jouissance, obviously we
shouldn't confuse them because we need them to make the three arcs of the same circle, namely,
the three arcs that bear down on desire.

The three maledictions are: You will lack every time you desire; you will only hope for
discharges; you will pursue the impossible jouissance. Desire is thus completely ensnared, it is
taken up in a circle.

How then is the problem of statements the same thing? It's the same at the level of the Cartesian
cogito, since you also construct your circle at the level of I walk, I breathe, I imagine, I see a
unicorn, a system of statements in which the I [je] is the subject of the statement, and that is
something like the appearance. Perhaps it's not true, perhaps God is deceiving me, perhaps I
believe I'm walking but I'm not walking. Second arc: but watch out, for if it's true that I can be
deceived when I say I'm walking, in return I cannot deceive myself when I say "I think I'm
walking." If it is true that I can be deceived when I say "I see a unicorn," I cannot be deceived
when I say "I think I'm seeing a unicorn." That's the extraction of the "I think, therefore I am,"
it's the extraction of the subject of enunciation; and the production of the statement, of any
statement, is made in the form of a splitting of the subject into the subject of enunciation and the
subject of the statement, as the condition of the production of any possible statement.

Desire-lack is found at the level of the splitting of the subject, of the cut, the bar. The desirepleasure system is found at the level of the subject of the statement. And the desire-jouissance
system is found at the level of the glory of the subject of enunciation, once again with the
mystification of the circle: you will command all the more insofar as you obey, i.e., you will be
all the more ready to be a true subject of enunciation insofar as you conform yourself to the bar
that separates you as a subject of the statement from the subject of enunciation. In other words,
it's through castration that you accede to desire. To say: it's through castration that you accede to
desire, or to say: it's through the splitting of the subject that you accede to the production of
statements, is the same thing.

Ryjik: You don't want to go further with Descartes' God and Lacan's signifier?

Deleuze: I don't want to, but I will, ouaf! ouaf! ouaf!

The problem becomes: supposing we say that only statements. . . that's desire. Every desire is a
statement, all statements are desires. If things are indeed like that, what we must give an account
of is the system of appearance; then it goes without saying that Nietzsche was completely right,
it's truly a Platonic Christian system. And if that leads to psychoanalysis, it's not by chance,
because psychoanalysis is the thing that says to us, "Come here, lie down, you're finally going to

                                                                                                    11

be able to speak in your name," and which, at the same time, withdraws in advance all possible
conditions for the production of statements, precisely because it has subordinated all production
of statements to the splitting of the subject of enunciation and the subject of the statement, i.e.,
you will command all the more insofar as you accept castration and you pursue the impossible
jouissance.

Richard III: It seems to me that desire-discharge is taken up again in Lacan in the form of
metonymy, it's not far -- but this is only an intuition -- from desire -- aufhebung, and that finally
the entire history of desire which is displaced, and which one never manages to get to, is the
trajectory of the Phenomenology of Spirit, broadly speaking. With precisely this jouissance, as an
impossible horizon, which would be absolute knowledge.

Gilles Deleuze: If you like, but there is no reason to privilege Hegel, because he is one of the
multiple cases where desire is defined as lack, but in the pages just before those on the master
and slave, everything passes through this circle: desire-lack, the illusion of pleasure, and desirejouissance.

Richard III: What's really interesting is that if you tie desire to the field of the Other and to the
treasure of the signifier, you truly have the process of Erinnerung. . .

Gilles Deleuze: Yes, it's not by chance that Lacan passed through Hegel; he has suppressed his
Hegelian texts . . .

The problem is that it will be necessary to explain the formation of this appearance: Under what
conditions do statements appear to be produced by a subject which, as the producer of
statements, would then necessarily be split into a subject of the statement and the subject of
enunciation. And above all, what does that permit as a falling-back [rabattement]? These are
things we have already done, you have two possible fallings-back: either the subject of
enunciation -- in any case, the splitting makes them fall back on each other -- either the subject
of enunciation will fall back on the subject of the statement, and that will be the Oedipal
apparatus, or else the subject of the statement will be granted to the subject of enunciation, and
that will be the paranoiac apparatus. The paranoiac is the subject of the statement that takes itself
to be the subject of enunciation.

I fear that there is no explanation that will make the formula any less dismal. The paranoiac is
truly someone who establishes himself between everything that can be used as a sign in a
network, or a system of networks, such that the sign refers to another sign. The sign no longer
refers either to the earth, or to a body, or to a thing, the sign refers to another sign in a system of
networks. Consequently, and at the same time, it is subsumed under a signifier. And this signifier
is what represents it for another signifier, the subject, following a well-known formula, namely:
the signifier is precisely the subject of enunciation. And the position of the paranoiac is very
typical and very formidable, because he is both the person who doubts the most and the person
who has the greatest power. Paranoia swarms in every direction: a sign here, oh, here's another
one, oh, but over there, etc. It's not like that in all deliriums. Once again, a paranoiac is networks,
and when he is taken in the networks, he doubts everything, he says to himself: perhaps I'm
being deceived. As a subject of the statement, he is perpetually in a kind of doubt, but at the

                                                                                                   12

same time, he recuperates everything, and he recuperates a certitude, he is the distributor of
signs, he is powerful and omnipotent to the degree that he leaps, he is unstable, at the level of the
subject of enunciation, and the formula of the paranoiac is at the level: I have guessed in
advance. He passes his time oscillating inside his network of signs.

It will be necessary to give an account of this production of an appearance. Once again, the
appearance consists in this: statements would be produced by a subject thus split. How was this
thing here able to produce that thing there? And this is the problem: How to say "me" [moi]?
How to dare to say "me"? As soon as I say "me," I situate myself both as a subject of the
statement and a subject of enunciation. And whenever there is this cleavage, there's all this
rubbish [saloperie] that comes along with it. I mean, for example: "Me as a human being." All
social functions are constructed on that, all repressive functions are constructed on this cleavage:
me as human being, you understand, but as a father, I must act! Me as human being, I'm on you
side; but as a cop, I have to apply the law! As a cop, I have to apply the law, which means that
I'm the subject of the statement. As a man, I understand you: that means I'm the subject of
enunciation. I will be a legislator all the more insofar as I am a subject, you will be a subject all
the more insofar as you are legislators, we all understand each other. . . . This is a way of saying:
OK, we are all castrated, it works.

What we were saying last week was: there are no individual statements, no statement can be
produced by an individual. Our hypothesis was that what produces statements were machinic
assemblages, or what amounts to the same thing, collective agents of enunciation -- on the
condition that we understand that collective does not mean peoples, but that it means, in
whatever sense the term is taken: what must be called collective agents of enunciation are all
multiplicities, whatever their nature. So that we must explain how machinic agents of
enunciation effectively produce variable statements in such and such circumstances, and produce
new types of statements; how these statements are necessarily desires; and how, within this
production, the illusion of the subject is engendered, of a subject split into a subject of
enunciation and a subject of the statement, who has the impression of producing statements
which, in fact, are produced by machinic assemblages or by the multiplicities acting in him.

We have to see how all this happens. We have to pose the problem practically! We have to pose
a series of oppositions, we have to make a table: how is a body without organs produced, the first
production of the statement. I mean: if something, in given conditions, does not function as a
body without organs, there is no surface on which to inscribe a statement. A body without organs
is the surface of inscription for every statement or for every desire. Except there is not a single
body without organs, there are as many as you like. It's a thing to produce or fabricate. A body
without organs does not preexist. Last time, I took the desert as a model, but on the condition
that certain things take place on it. The desert is indeed a place or a surface for the production of
statements. There are no statements linked to drugs that do not presuppose as prior the
constitution of a body without organs. . . . whatever takes place on the order of the event, i.e., the
statement or desire, the event is finally the very identity of the statement and of desire, whatever
takes place implies the constitution of a body without organs. As long as you have not made your
body without organs, alone, with someone else, with n people, nothing is possible, you have to
find your own.

                                                                                                   13

In the bad column, that of the false conception of desire, we'll put the organism. Here, it would
be necessary to show how a body without organs is formed on this organism, how there appears
on it a probe head, a machinic point, and this machinic point is this instance of movement that
will be found later in this or that assemblage. The body without organs, the desert, is
fundamentally populated. The problem of the unconscious is not really that of generations, it is a
problem of population, it is a matter of know how one populates. When [André] Green writes,
don't go too far, a schizophrenic is someone who has a father and mother like everybody else, it's
not true. [The reference to Green occurs earlier, in Anti-Oedipus, notably p. 305]

I have here a text by an old schizo, it's very beautiful, this text. It's made up of tales: "I love to
invent people, tribes, racial origins … and to imagine other behaviors, a thousand other ways of
being. I have always had a complex for exploration, and I only like to count on very fantastic
explorations. For example, my deserts are like diversions, desert-diversions, for whomever can
imagine these strange simulators of [missing word], these kinds of oneiric songs. I let myself go;
I have the tendency to put my guilty experiences on my characters, to mistreat them" -- you see it
is a matter of populating the desert -- "to use mental cruelty against them, by provocation. I have
the rage to imagine how that can work, a being in an extreme situation, after all, it's a passion . .
.” [tape inaudible]. In all these tales, it is solely a question of deserts populated with tribes: “I
return from my tribes. As of today, I am the adoptive son of fifteen tribes, no more, no less. And
they in turn are my adopted tribes, for I love each of them more than if I had been born into it.”
[For this citation, unattributed, see A Thousand Plateaus, p. 30] Over there, a child has the right
to adopt another tribe. There are many renegade children, and they don't feel exiled at all. But
their true parents? What do you mean by their true parents? Their true progenitors, their parents,
are first of all whomever the child recognizes as such, progenitors or adopted, that is to say, the
tribes. One is a child of a population and not the child of a father or a mother. A schizo thinks
like that.

In the other column, as opposed to assemblages of multiplicities, there is the theme of the subject
of enunciation, the split subject as the source of dualisms. To the anti-Oedipal apparatus is
opposed the Oedipal apparatus, or to the becoming inhuman, the becoming animal, is opposed
the becoming human of the other column. To monism-pluralism is opposed the dualities that
follow from the false conception of the statement. To desire or the thought-process is opposed
the conception of desire-lack-pleasure-jouissance; just as the two statuses of the sign we looked
at last time are opposed, namely, the sign gathered together in a network that subordinates it to
the signifier, and on the contrary, the sign that sets to work on its own account, that frees itself
from the hypothesis of the signifier and which is coupled with a particle or a system of particles,
i.e., the sign-particle as opposed to the sign-signifier. It would be necessary to know what
machinic point marks the maximum of deterritorialization on this body without organs; this
history of the machinic point that will mark the currents of deterritorialization on the BwO seems
to me to be very complicated. It is also necessary to see the machinic assemblages that flow from
it, and then the becomings animal, or, what amounts to the same thing, the intensities. The
deterritorialized intensities that crisscross [quadrillent] the body without organs. And in all this,
the subject is, à la lettre, a nomadic particle which traverses all that, the lines of
deterritorialization, the intensities. The problem of the genesis of the illusion is: What is going to
fix the subject? At the same time, it will be turned into an organism, it will be submitted to the

                                                                                                    14

cogito, it will be fixed, its submission will be assured, by telling it: it's you who produces
statements.

Next time, we'll have to look at Carlos Casteneda's book. [While Deleuze and Guattari cite
several in A Thousand Plateaus, this first reference is likely to the first in the Don Juan series,
The Teachings of Don Juan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971] It recounts, broadly
speaking, not an initiation, but truly an experimentation. The guy would indeed like to be
initiated, because he's a poor guy, and the Indian tells him no problem. Carlos says to him: teach
me, I want to know, i.e., he treats the old Indian like one treats one's psychoanalyst, and the
Indian tells him: begin by finding your body without organs. Carlos's search for his BwO is
pathetic, he is looking in a restrained space, in a kind of desert, that's the joyous experimentation;
and in a certain way, this search is to find the place where one is at ease [la place où on est bien].
From a schizoanalytic perspective, the guy has to find where he is at ease, and in what position,
if he wants to hang from the ceiling. . . . There's no reason for him to lie down. And Carlos looks
for his place by rolling around in the grass, he seeks until he finds. Once he's found his place, he
no longer lives as a subject, but as a tiny thing [truc], a tiny particle, and then there is a more
brilliant particle, the Indian.

Then, a machinic assemblage begins. In what form? In the form that it is necessary to have an
ally. On the one hand, it is necessary to have a teacher, an experimenter, but it is also necessary
to have a powerful ally. All this begins to make a little machine where something is going to
happen; a certain distribution of intensities is already being drawn on this body without organs.
And then he sees a dog, he plays at being dog [il fait le chien], but it's not that either, he doesn't
play dog; he is in the process of undoing the organization of the body in favor of something else.
One feels that the problem is not that of becoming animal; the dog is not a dog. The Indian says:
that's not a dog, it's anything at all, whatever you like. What is this type of becoming inhuman,
which is expressed badly in saying "he's playing dog"? He has traversed certain intensities,
which one can represent by: dog, as in Kafka. Kafka also plays dog, but he doesn't need drugs to
do so; he invented another machine for himself in order to do it. At the end, Carlos annoys the
Indian so much that the Indian says to him, "But this dog, what, you take yourself for what? It's
not your whore of a mother." That's anti-psychoanalysis. This dog here is the outcome [sortie] of
the Oedipal apparatus. He followed his body without organs, lines of deterritorialization
following deterritorialized intensities.

Why these intensities rather than others? He'll then become a lizard; then he'll progress, he'll
become a crow. To play the crow [faire le corbeau] truly consists in making the legs and wings
of the crow grow from his face, to be populated with crows. It was not to play dog, it was to be
populated with dogs. To play dog, it is not enough to go "woof, woof, woof," one has to pass
through other experimentations. This changes everything in the problem of totemism.

When structuralists speak of totemism, it's rather poor, dry. Totemism has always had certain
relations with the history of drugs, but it is not that at all, for in the second book, where the
experimentation continues even more strongly, we witness the passage from becoming inhuman,
from becoming intense to something yet again which is a kind of becoming molecular, as if the
disorganisation of the organism in favor of a body living in another mode, again implying

                                                                                                15

something more. And that's clairvoyance. What does it mean to see inside? [Given the context,
the reference is no doubt to Carlos Castaneda’s second book, A Separate Reality (1971)]

That consists above all in seeing water, and Carlos, through an entire series of stages, sees the
water that is modified, hardened, immobilized, and which, above all, is dissociated. At the end, it
is molecularized and he grasps the water through its constitutive bubbles; but he can't grasp and
see the water through the constitutive molecular bubbles except in connection [liaison] with what
is produced by experimentation . . . [End of the text and recording from WebDeleuze]