Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema and Thought, 1984-1985

Lecture 01, 30 October 1984 (Cinema Course 67)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze [transcribers not attributed]; additional revisions to
the transcription and time stamp, Charles J. Stivale

Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1

Because in this process of normalization that's affecting universities, we're now proceeding –
as far as I've understood this – by way of time slots… time slots meaning that, on one hand, I
think classes are now two and a half hours long, and then these time slots allow for extensive
switching of rooms. For us in the philosophy department, this is a disaster for one simple
reason: there are a lot of auditors who, for work reasons or because of unemployment benefit
claims, or the like, can't make it here before 10 a.m., and in fact we've all received a lot of
letters on this subject saying it’s impossible for them to get here at half past nine, even if they
wanted to. So, my problem is to find a room where, while appearing to respect these new
time slots, I essentially ignore them, meaning I continue to have a room where I can start at
10 o'clock and finish around one, before either of us get too tired.

So, I hope this is going to work. But then everything gets so muddled when... well, we'll see
what happens this morning, if at half past eleven or even noon, someone who’s been assigned
this room comes to bother us – I hope not… If so, it would be a disaster. I'll have to negotiate
to have another room, if there is one, where I'll be able to get my three hours from 10 to 1,
but then I'd be encroaching on two time slots. You understand how tricky this is. It's all part
of the process through which universities are now being brought into line with high schools.
So, there you have it. Just to let you know that this morning we may have a problem, we
might get chased out of here... Someone, well... we'll just have to see. Having said that, it's
now 10 o'clock, so we should get started with this year's work.

And I'd like to get started right away but at the same time I want to begin by constructing our
program, because it's only if I propose a program that you'll be able to see, on one hand,
whether or not you want to attend, and on the other, if you do continue to attend, how you can
plug into this or that part. And in this sense, there are a few things I can suggest to you... so
you can decide how and when you want to participate. So, as I announced… I already
announced two years ago, or was it three, I don't know, that I was done talking about cinema,
and yet here I am with another year still to go. After that, I really don't see what more I would
have to say, and so that’ll be it. And on the other hand, perhaps some of you, or indeed many
of you, have realized over the past few years that what concerned me, what interested me
most, was introducing the question "What is philosophy?" to which, from next year onwards,
I will be devoting myself with all the strength I still have.

And so this year, I'd like to give, or propose to you, one last course on cinema, or on a certain
aspect of cinema, which after all is the final aspect I have to cover. There wasn’t much
choice. For the first couple of years, we were looking at the movement-image. Last year, we
saw the time-image. So, what did I have left to do? Well, what was left was the thoughtimage. You see, we're getting closer to the question that most concerns me, "What is
philosophy?", but here it’s still in terms of an encounter between cinema and philosophy.

What do I mean by thought and cinema? I'd like to do what I did last year. That is to say, this
reflection, although seemingly focused on cinema, should not prevent us from developing
things, or from creating spaces for philosophy where we can consider philosophical themes in
their own right, without having to break up the whole of our project. For those of you who
were here last year, for example, I developed a number of threads devoted to Neoplatonism,
developments that stood on their own merits, or developments on Kant, that again stood on
their own merits and which didn't prevent us from finding our main thread, which was time
and cinema. This year, I'd like to do the same thing in terms of thought; there will be
occasional philosophical slots dealing solely with problems of philosophy in relation to
thought. But why, why this organization?

I'd like to say that, though I'm not yet at the point of considering the relation between thought
and cinema – I'm just trying to bring it about, to establish it – I've nonetheless always been
struck by the fact that any exercise in thought, philosophical or otherwise, but particularly
philosophical, presupposes a certain image thought has of itself. This presupposed image of
thought is not always easy to tease out. What's more, it varies with history. Does this mean
that it depends on an external causality, a social causality, a historical causality? I'm not sure.
It certainly varies with history, but for the moment, I can't say any more. We can probably
assign causes to this variation, but the causes of this variation tell us nothing about the nature
of the variation itself. So, I suppose that all thought presupposes an image of thought, a
variable image.

To better understand what I mean by the presupposed image of thought, the first thing to say
is that, in my view, it shouldn’t be confused with what everyone calls method. Thinking
implies a method. Method has two aspects. For example, there's Descartes' method. There's a
Kantian method. Okay. Philosophy can, in a way, be explicitly defined as the methodology of
thought. A method has two aspects: a temporal aspect, the order of thoughts. The
organization of the order of thoughts is one aspect of the method. Then it has another aspect:
a spatial one, meaning the determination of the aims, means and obstacles of thought, which
characterizes the spatial aspect: what are the aims of thought, why think; what are the means
of thought, how to think; and what are the obstacles to thought – all of these constitute this
other aspect. These are the two aspects of the method. What I’m saying is that the
presupposed image of thought is not to be confused with method, it is presupposed by
method. The method doesn't tell us what image thought has of itself. The method presupposes
an image of thought, an implicit image of thought, a variable image.

So this presupposed image of thought, insofar as it is presupposed by any method, how can
we find a simple way to characterize it? Here, I’m going to use a word that I borrow from the
linguist and great literary critic [Mikhail] Bakhtin: chronotope. He employs this word,
chronotope, in a very simple sense: it's a time-space. It's a time-space, a spatiotemporal
continuum. He tells us, for example, that the question "What is the novel?" implies the
emergence of the chronotope specific to the novel, which is to say a type of time-space that
the novel presupposes. In the same way, I would say that there is a chronotope of thought,

and that any method, from its double point of view – on one hand the order of thoughts, the
temporal order of thoughts, and on the other the distribution of goals, means and obstacles –
refers to a chronotope of thought, a chronotope that can undergo variations, mutations, and
that is never given. What is given is a method, but what is presupposed is not given. It takes a
special effort to uncover it.

So how can we recognize this chronotope of thought, this time-space presupposed by any
spatiotemporal organization of thought? Philosophical discourse develops within it, but it is
not itself an object of philosophical discourse. The philosophical discourse that develops
presupposes the chronotope. The chronotope itself can only be marked out, and what marks it
out are not concepts as elements of philosophical discourse but something more unusual. This
is what – a long time ago, it seems to me it was a while ago, years even, but it's a theme I
don't want to abandon because when I eventually move on to the question of "What is
philosophy?" it will be of increasingly fundamental importance for me – I would say that it is
marked out… this time-space, this chronotope, is essentially marked out and signaled by
cries. In other words, there are philosophical cries that envelop the implicit image of thought.

Then there's the discourse, and the discourse covers the cries; there's the method, and the
method covers the chronotope, or image of thought. But this image, this time-space that is as
it were marked, whose places and moments are marked by cries, amounts to saying: there are
philosophical cries. Everyone knows that birds distinguish between their cries and their
songs. The cry of alarm, for example, is not a song. Ornithologists would have a lot to teach
us if they could provide us with clear distinctions between songs and cries. But I can say that
in philosophy, there are discourses, and that discourses are not the same thing as cries.
Discourse, then, is the philosophers' song. It's their way of singing, and now you see there are
philosophical cries. We run the risk of missing the point, of having the idea that philosophy is
a dead thing, if we equate it solely with the discourse it elaborates. A philosophical cry can
always be translated in terms of discourse. But then something resists, and if you have the
slightest taste for philosophy, you know that these are its cries, and it’s here that philosophy
finds the points of its birth, and of its life.

And what are they? Because, at first glance, they could easily be mistaken for simple
propositions that are part of the discourse. Well, no, no, no, no, they’re something else. So,
what do they refer to? And why do they do so? Are they founded, unfounded, are they
completely arbitrary? What makes a philosopher raise a philosophical cry? I mentioned the
cries of alarm that birds make, they're not songs, but at least we know why – they sound an
alarm. There are cries other than those of alarm. There are cries of love that are not the same
thing as bridal songs. So, if the philosopher is someone who cries out in his own way, what
does he have to cry out about? Let's look for examples.

When I read Aristotle, I see an admirable discourse that is Aristotle's song, and I recognize
this song, it's a way of singing that has no equivalent. I don't confuse Aristotle's song with
Plato's song. And then, all of a sudden, I hear something in Aristotle, and I stumble on the
formula: “It is indeed necessary to stop”. If we were to make a real analysis of the
propositions, I'd say, ah, that's very odd. When Aristotle tells us what substance is, he
develops it in a speech-song. When he tells us “It is indeed necessary to stop”, it’s not a
proposition of the same nature as the former. “It is indeed necessary to stop” is a cry.1

What does he mean by this? He means: you won't be able to go back… it's odd, that these are
already written propositions, propositions that can only be expressed in the form of an

interpellation, you... He doesn't have to say it explicitly. He tells us that you can't endlessly
go from a concept back to a more general one. "It is indeed necessary to stop", meaning that
there are ultimate concepts. Well, I don't know if there are ultimate concepts any more than
you do. But here you have someone telling you that it is indeed necessary to stop, but they
can only do so in the form of a cry. In other words, it is necessary for thought to stop
somewhere, for it to grasp the point at which it can go no further. I’m not saying I’m right or
wrong in this, it’s a matter of sensibility, I'm not trying to convince you of anything, but I
have the feeling that this is no longer part of philosophical discourse, it's a philosophical cry.
And if we say to him, why, why is it necessary to stop? The question isn't even relevant. Here
we've reached a point where philosophy no longer has to give its reasons. So, who is this cry
addressed to? This is perhaps the most important thing about the hidden part of philosophy.

Descartes wrote a philosophical discourse that he calls the Meditations. It's his own song, and
in Meditations there appears the famous formula “I think therefore I am”. And “I think
therefore I am” can be considered a proposition or part of a philosophical discourse. It has its
place in the Meditations, in the second meditation to be exact – there's a first and then a
second, etc., there are five in all, occurring precisely in the order we've come to refer to as the
order of reasons – it's part of philosophical discourse, and yet it shatters it. “I think therefore I
am” is formulated as a cry. It's Descartes' cry. Why is it a cry? It's because his statement is:
You can't deny that if I think, then I am.

What’s the point of all this? The important thing is this aspect of the cry, and indeed, “I think
therefore I am” claims to do what? It claims to give us a new type of definition of man,
against Aristotle’s. For Aristotle, man is a rational animal. Descartes says that this is
discourse. To say that man is a rational animal is discourse, because “animal” and “rational”
are concepts that themselves refer to other concepts. And he says: no, we need to reach
something else, and “I think, therefore I am” is supposed to replace – although it pertains to a
completely different world – it’s supposed to replace “man is a rational animal.” The true
determination of man is “I think, therefore I am”, and not at all that “man is a rational
animal.” In other words, he wants the determination of man to be expressed in a cry.

I’m leaping forward. When Leibniz says “Everything has a reason” … and when he is able to
derive from this, a thousand things for the philosophical discourse that will compose his own
system – because this “Everything has a reason” leads to many things, this idea that
everything has a reason… but why shouldn't there also be things that don’t have a reason?
Well, actually no, Leibniz doesn't want things to exist without a reason. Long before being a
logical principle, “Everything has a reason” is a cry. Or else, it already convinces us that
there are cries of reason. The cries of reason are generally expressed in the general form: You
cannot deny that... You cannot deny that it is necessary to stop somewhere, you cannot deny
that everything has a reason, you cannot deny that if you think, you are.

And, strangely enough, philosophy also includes cries of unreason. It's not only reason that
cries out. There are cries of unreason. Contrariwise, we could say that these can be expressed
as "What if I deny". What if I deny that two and two make four? You'll tell me that's all just
words. No. Dostoevsky utters the cry of unreason, "I deny that two and two make four". In
other words, he launches a battle against the self-evident. Dostoyevsky, in this famous text
which is also philosophical, cries out: “I want, I want someone to account for every victim of
history; I will not rest, and I will not leave you in peace, until you have accounted for every
victim of history”. A disciple of Dostoevsky, [Léon or Lev] Shestov, throughout his work,
repeats this… Well, what is it? The cry of unreason. It’s not that unreason has the privilege of

crying out, but there are cries of unreason just as there are cries of reason, and sometimes we
don't know which is crying out, whether it's reason or unreason. Okay.

“Give me a body, then”. Isn’t it odd that thought, which for millennia sought to escape from
the body, should come to say – and is this a discourse? – “Give me a body, then”. “Give me a
body, then”: you can tell right away – I don't know but I want you to feel that this is
something you can almost sniff out – that it's a philosophical cry.2 So philosophy itself
depends on having a flair or a superior capacity, a taste. And why not? What is it that judges
concepts, if not the cries themselves? Isn't it only through the cry that concepts can come to
life? If you're not sensitive to this philosophical cry, you're not sensitive to philosophy. It's
just the way it is for fish. Philosophical cries are like the cries of fish. If you can’t hear the cry
of the fish, you don't know what life is. If you don't hear the cry of philosophers… the cries
of philosophers, you don't know what life is and you don't know what philosophy is either!
You don't know what thought is! But of course, you do know what the cry of the fish is, and
what the cry of philosophy is. So, philosophers are fish? Okay then.

[Antonin] Artaud spoke of affective athleticism in relation to his theater and, even more, to
his conception of thought.3 There is a philosophical athleticism. Philosophical athleticism is
the power to utter specifically philosophical cries. What am I getting at? I would say that,
well, only philosophical thought presupposes an image of thought, a chronotope, a time-space
in which cries resound, period. I'll stop here with this, and we’ll continue next year. You see,
this is just my first point, but I'll leave it at that and move on to what we're going to be
speaking about this year. [No interruption of the recording; 31:17]

Part 2

If it's true that thought presupposes an image of thought, then isn't there – and in what form –
an encounter between the image – an encounter, not an identification– an encounter between
the image of thought and the cinematographic image? You see that my starting point is
extremely simple: all thought presupposes an image of thought. So, what encounter, if any, is
there between the image of thought and the cinematographic image? This is the starting point
from which we can build our program.

And you can already see what I expect from you, which we haven't done in previous years…
of course I'm well aware that in other years – I think it worked well, especially when last year
there were some very good moments in my view, because some of you contributed a great
deal, for example, if I think about what we did regarding the crystal and so on. What I
suggest this year... I know that it’s very difficult to interrupt me because when I'm
interrupted, I lose my train of thought and I no longer know what I'm saying. So, it's not easy
for you, even when you feel like doing so. But what we could do is this. It’s fine to interrupt
me, of course, I always encourage you to do it, even if I might react with impatience, but
never mind, you've got to do it. But what we could try to do is that at the start of each of our
sessions, if we're not too bothered by these room changes, at the start of each of our sessions,
those who have something to remark regarding the previous session can do so.

What I'd like is for some of you to remind us of a particular point from the previous session
where things weren’t clear and that we should go back to, go back over the point in question.
We would perhaps go more slowly, but it might also be richer. So, if you like, we could
devise a sort of... where questions could be posed at the start of each session. I'd personally
love it if you were to tell me: Well, no, what you did last time, there was a moment where we

went too fast or it was too vague, we need to go back over it. For example, next time, you
might very well say to me. Actually this business about the cinematographic image and the
image of thought isn’t clear to me, you have to go back over it a bit. So, in that case, either I'll
answer you that it couldn't be clearer, so tough luck… or I'll say, yes let's try, let's try. Or else
you yourselves will make it clearer, that would be my dream.

So there you have it, this is just my entry point: does an encounter take place – given that I've
just tried to define what I call the image of thought – does an encounter take place between
the cinematographic image and the image of thought, and if so, on what basis? There, you've
got that down, fine, so let's get on with it, let's get started… in other words, we're now going
to construct our program around this problem, since it is indeed a problem. So, let's build the
program. In what way does the cinematographic image enter into relation with an image of
thought? At this point, you should be aware that there is a lot we can expect, namely that
whether or not it relates to an image of thought, it undoubtedly orients it. It’s likely that the
cinematographic image will relate to a very precise image of thought that it will itself induce.
The question is: Does this image of thought induced by the cinematographic image
correspond to images of thought specific to philosophy?

Now, I have to begin from a factual observation. Since we're constructing a program, this
program is going to contain specific bibliographical references which I'll be coming back to
over the year, and I'd like each of you – but we'll see about this when we’ve built our
program – to take up a piece… to develop an interest in this or that aspect. And the reason
I'm constructing this program is to allow people who have no interest in what I'm doing this
year not to come.

And I think there's something quite odd, if we go back, let's say, to the first great pioneers of
cinema, because the first great pioneers of cinema made no secret of the fact that, for them,
cinema represented a revolution in thought… in every respect. And these are the splendid
declarations by [Sergei] Eisenstein, or [Abel] Gance, or [Jean] Epstein. I'll take the three
most... those who went furthest down this road: cinema brings with it a new way of thinking.
I'll add a pioneer of film criticism, since the other three are filmmakers, great filmmakers…
Élie Faure. Élie Faure, who was also a great art critic, took up the question of cinema and saw
in it the advent of a new way of thinking. And these remain splendid texts.4

Yet, oddly enough, we have to admit that today they make us laugh – we smile with
tenderness and respect and admiration, but laugh all the same. We don't appear to believe this
anymore… this simple idea that film directors can be great thinkers has become something
few people believe. How can this be? How can it be? Cinema, or we in its stead, have
renounced the ambitions that early cinema had. We salute the demands and ambitions of
Gance, Eisenstein and Epstein. But they seem a little derisory to us, they seem quite frankly
naïve. What happened? – you might ask. Here we have an art form that at the outset never
ceased to situate itself in relation to thought, and today, if you look at the abundant
bibliography on cinema, what books are there that deal with the question of the relation
between cinema and thought? As far as I know, in France at least, there are only two. There’s
Serge Daney's collection of articles, La rampe… and then there’s [Jean-Louis] Schefer's
extraordinary book, The Ordinary Man of Cinema. That isn’t much, in fact it's very little.5

So, what did the pioneers have to say? They were telling us that, in every respect, cinema was
helping to renew thought, that is, to induce a new image of thought, I'd almost say, from four
points of view: from a qualitative point of view, from a quantitative point of view, from a

relational point of view, and from a modal point of view – given that these are the names of
Kant's four major categories: Quality, Quantity, Relation, Modality.

Qualitatively speaking, it was a new way of thinking. In what way new? I'll have to put off
answering that for a moment. But it was a form of thought that had no equivalent in the other
arts. From a quantitative point of view, the answer can be given immediately: it was an art
and thought of the masses, the art of the masses. With cinema, the people became subjects,
the masses became the subjects of thought. There are countless statements by the Soviets in
this regard, by Vertov, Eisenstein, but also Gance. From a relational point of view, cinema
was a language, but a universal language. From the point of view of modality, cinema forced
thought out of the realm of mere possibility, the possibility of thinking, and subjected it to a
necessity: you cannot avoid thinking.

What happened? What happened that these great authors are now treated as naive, or
considered ingenuous? Sure, a lot has happened. I'd like to take one example: no one any
longer believes in cinema as a universal language. Why is this? Among other things, because
a linguistics-inspired semiology took the issue in hand. And the branch of semiology inspired
by linguistics, as established by Christian Metz, wanted to attract… it wanted to import rigor
into the study of the relation between language and cinema. And this linguistics-inspired
semiology, which wanted to bring linguistic rigor to the confrontation between cinema and
the language system [langue], or between cinema and language [langage], well, this
linguistics-inspired semiology denounced the assimilation of cinema and universal language
as naïve, confused and hasty. It strikes me, in life as elsewhere, that you never know who the
real naïve ones are. And in fact, it will be part of our program to take a closer look at what the
pioneers of cinema called cinema as a universal language, and to see if linguistic semiology
didn’t miss the point in what it was suggesting at the time, and if this doesn't represent a
fundamental retreat from the pioneers and their so-called naivety. So, it's clear that if we’re
going to deal with cinema and thought this year, we'll have to take a very close look at this
problem of the relation between film and language.6

But it can't be said that it was the influence of linguistic semiology, or even that of talking
pictures, that sounded the death knell for the idea of a universal thought. It had already been
foreseen by one of the defenders of cinema's greatest early ambitions, namely Élie Faure. Élie
Faure, in his book – well, in the collection of his articles published in the Médiations series
under the title Fonction du cinema – Élie Faure has a rather odd passage in which he senses,
he tells us, that cinema is the successor to the art of cathedrals. He titles his chapter or article
"[Introduction à la] mystique du cinéma." Faure presents cinema as a new form of thought,
the art of the masses, a universal language, the successor to the art of cathedrals. And then he
has a doubt, a small doubt, and I'd like you to listen carefully to this doubt. “True friends” –
it's on page 51 – “True friends of the cinema have only seen in it a worthy instrument of
propaganda” – he writes this very early on – “Maybe”, says Élie Faure…

You’ll see what this implies. Élie Faure is part of the great cohort of pioneers who say: new
thought, universal language, art of the masses where the masses become the subject. And he
says, “True friends” – he’s not talking about enemies of cinema – “True friends of the cinema
have only seen in it a worthy ‘instrument of propaganda’. Maybe. The pharisees of politics,
art, letters and science itself will find in the cinema the most faithful of servants until the day
when, by a mechanical intervention of roles…” – no, I'm sorry – “until the day when by a
mechanical reversal of roles, it will enslave them in turn”. It's a very moving text, because…
you realise what he's saying? He's saying, well yes, there's a looming danger that cinema will

be used for propaganda. But don't worry, he adds, one must be optimistic. Don't worry,
because by mechanical reversal, it's cinema that, being mechanical, will enslave the Pharisees
who want to use it as a propaganda tool. In other words, it will happen of its own accord.
Thanks to its technical power, cinema won't allow itself to be used technically. Of course, we
can settle for this and say, fine.7

At the same time, does this put us on the right track? What is it that has made the great
declarations of the pioneers… pioneers of cinema and thought, seem somehow derisory? In
his book La rampe, Serge Daney says it very well: It is state propaganda, it’s state
propaganda that very quickly took hold of cinema, meaning that the state found in cinema
something that was fundamental to it, namely the possibility to establish and propagate its
great mises en scène. The state as director needed cinema, and the grand stagings of
fascism… the great activities of a propaganda state, enslaved cinema, used it to stifle all
thought, and so completely annulled, in accordance with Élie Faure's brief forewarning,
completely annulled the ambitions of cinema. That is, instead of cinema making the masses
its true thinking subject, it contributed to the alienation of the masses, and to the fascization
of the masses. This is what would make the great declarations of Eisenstein, Gance and
Epstein seem so beautiful today but at the same time so old-fashioned that we no longer dare
speak of a relation between cinema and thought.8

In a way, Paul Virilio's recent thesis goes even further than Daney's remark. Of course, one
can always say, one can always say that what has killed cinema is the mediocrity of what is
produced. Once again, it's not, it's not... yes and no, yes and no. That the vast majority of
cinema production is worthless, completely worthless goes without saying, but this is not a
good argument, it only functions as an argument under certain conditions. I mean, it's no
worse than in any other sector, absolutely no worse than in any other sector. If you look at the
field of literature and publishing, for example, it’s clear that books deserving to be called
“novels”, in terms of the number of fiction titles published each year – I'm talking about the
novel as genre – in terms of the amount of fiction published yearly, they account for less than
5% of what is published. The vast majority of fiction published yearly belongs to the
Aphrodite collection and similar such “collections” that clog up station platforms and station
bookshops have unimaginable print runs, and have nothing whatsoever to do with what you
could call a novel. To say nothing about the rest, but even there it’s the same story. You can't
say that the music production of chansonnettes [genre of popular French romantic songs],
which constitutes the vast bulk of music production, that this production is... so the situation
in cinema is no worse, really no worse than anywhere else. Once again, the nullity of most of
what gets produced has always been a law in all so-called "artistic" fields.

You could tell me, perhaps – and here I'm not qualified to answer – you could tell me that
since cinema is – and this is precisely the idea I wanted to get at, which seems essential for
today’s lesson – since cinema is an industrial art, the quantitative proportion of its nullity
plays an infinitely greater and more dangerous role than in other disciplines, and you can't
pose the problem in the same way for an industrial art you would in the case of other arts.
That's possible. But in any case, it wasn't the mediocrity of production that spelt the end of
early cinema’s ambitions. No, it wasn’t that, it was something worse. If I were to sum up
Serge Daney's thesis, it wasn’t the mediocrity of production, it was Leni Riefenstahl, who
was by no means a mediocrity, it was Hitler's appointed filmmaker who sounded the death
knell for the great ambitions of cinema, and once again, she was no mediocrity.

But to go back to what I was saying, if I take Paul Virilio's recent thesis, he goes even further
than Serge Daney. In his book The Logistics of Perception: War and Cinema, Virilio tells us
something of this order: don't believe that cinema has been diverted from its goals by the
propaganda state – which is what Daney suggests – or by the fascist state.9 From the outset,
cinematography was linked to the organization of war, or to that of the fascist state. This is a
good thesis, because it's a bit like the way we operate: one always has to go back further to
understand how things were already going wrong from the very start. You know, there’s no
point in saying how things went wrong with Stalin, no, they already took a turn for the worse
with Lenin. You just have to go back further. And then things go back quite a bit with
Lenin… Oh dear, Marx was even worse, he was simply unable to do what he wanted, but if
he had managed to do what he wanted, what would... you would have seen that things would
have turned out even worse. So Virilio is better in this regard, Virilio's better, he goes back to
the source.

Right from the start, there's this abominable coupling between cinema and war. And worse,
between cinema and war organization, cinema and fascist organization. And Virilio's
argument is very interesting. It consists in saying, “You know, there's always been a
fundamental coupling between the weapon and the eye.” That's his starting point, the
weapon-eye coupling. Namely, that the battlefield is not simply a place of action but a field of
perception. Weapons are affects, but the affects of war go hand in hand with percepts, and
just as much as the launching of weapons, in the organization of war there is a need to
perceive its fields. So an exemplary pairing in this respect is the camera-machine-gun. The
plane strafes and shoots film of what it strafes. And this doublet, this coupling, is essential,
essential. The history of war is no less a history of the eye than it is a history of the weapon.
It’s a fine thesis. And in a way, war is a vast mise en scène. Virilio's proof is that it's not so
much a question of hiding – though it is important to hide, for example, to hide the existence
of secret organizations – it's above all a question of setting up decoys, making the enemy
believe that a massing of troops is taking place, or building wooden tanks that will have the
enemy believe that an attack is in the works, that it’s being prepared in this or that location.
It's all about this doublet of weapon and mise en scène.

And this fundamental link between weapon and mise en scène is what the fascists were the
first to discover, and to push to a hitherto unknown point. And Virilio has some fine
intuitions and is delighted to recall that, right up to the end, right up to the very end,
Goebbels, wanting to rival Hollywood, organized super productions, and that Hitler's
deputies, particularly in the field of passive defense, would rebuild cities with columns of
lights, false cities, cinematographic cities, cities of pure light, architectures of light and so on,
a whole staging of the state, of state propaganda and state war. In other words, what Virilio is
saying is that there has always been a bizarre link between Hollywood and fascism, which
explains the collapse of the old Hollywood after the war. Not in the sense that Hollywood had
been compromised by fascism, no, but in the sense that cinema as conceived by Hollywood
had been infinitely perfected by the organization of war and fascism, to the point where it
was no longer possible to believe in such a cinema.10

So, from Daney's thesis to Virilio's, it seems to me that progress has been made, a kind of
escalation that would at least provide us with a reason why we no longer dare to speak of
cinema as a new mode of thought, of cinema as the art of the masses, where the masses have
become the very subject of cinema as a universal language. We've lost those hopes. Except,
except… Does this mean that… Obviously a certain discretion has been exercised in
considering the relationship between cinema and thought – but I return to my theme: doesn't

this simply mean that post-war cinema breaks with a certain image of thought that cinema
had encountered up until then, but renews its nuptials with another, even more interesting,
image of thought? How can we not consider, for example, [Alain] Resnais as a thinker, or
[Jean-Luc] Godard as a thinker, [Luchino] Visconti as a thinker? It may be okay to compare
them with painters, or to compare them with composers. But what we really need is to
rediscover the tradition of early cinema, while bearing in mind all its differences, where the
comparisons also necessarily involved the relation between the cinematographic image and a
new image of thought. Perhaps then, during the course of its short history, cinema would
confront two very different images of thought. It’ll be up to us to find out.

Let me give you a simple example: we can talk about colors, for example, in the work of the
great colorists of cinema, [Michelangelo] Antonioni, Visconti and Godard. We can also talk
about their own way of being philosophers. We tend not to take the thought of filmmakers
seriously, because we know that it has no real value independent of the context, the
cinematographic context of their works. If you extract it from the context of their works, it no
longer has value. But that's the situation in every field. If you remove a philosopher's thought
from the philosophical context of their works, I assure you, what you have is just platitudes,
by definition… by definition. Even [Jean] Renoir is a great thinker if you consider his work
in its context. He doesn't just have something to show, he really has something to say through
this.

Do you want to know something? Well, Godard is an Aristotelian. I remember a very brilliant
article by Sartre on [Jean] Giraudoux – it's reprinted in Situations 111 – where Sartre explains
that Giraudoux is the very realization of Aristotle. And yet there's no reason to think that
Giraudoux knew Aristotle very well. He's a very cultivated man, but then, he may not have
read much Aristotle, except for his high school diploma, and even then, we don't really study
Aristotle at that level. And yet, Sartre's article is very convincing in describing how
Giraudoux's world is an Aristotelian world – here I'm making facile transitions – but I
happen to be highly sensitive to the admiration Godard has for Giraudoux. Giraudoux is one
of Godard's secret authors. He sometimes admits as much, like in his most recent film,
Prénom Carmen [First Name Carmen, 1983], where you'll recall that Giraudoux’s work is
constantly referred to – Cela s'appelle l'aurore (That is the Dawn) – and Godard has always
had a kind of indulgence for Giraudoux, an unavowable Swiss indulgence. For him, his
writing is the epitome of lightness in literature. And, thanks to that, I'd say he's even more
Aristotelian than Giraudoux. But do you know in what sense Giraudoux is Aristotelian? It's
because Aristotle is the philosopher who, precisely by virtue of his cry, "It is indeed
necessary to stop", was the first to formulate and construct a table of categories.

Now, tell me… I'm in trouble... Open the door and call the guy back… this doesn't look good.
I've got a feeling...

Student: There's an amorphous mass of people out there.

Deleuze: Ask them if they have class...

Student: They don't know!

Deleuze: That's good, that's a very good sign. So, yes, you understand, I'm going slowly,
but... what was I saying, anyway? I don't know what I was saying...

Ah yes, Godard is an Aristotelian, you know why? Because a far as I am aware, he has never
constructed a film without – and this must have been a deliberate decision, Godard has read a
lot, so there’s no reason why he shouldn’t have read Aristotle as well – but he’s never
constructed a film without, either explicitly or implicitly, dividing it according to what we
might call "categories". We'll see, this will give us an object, a little break where we can
speak about Aristotle's categories in relation to Godard, but that will have to wait for a later
date. Anyway, he always has this division. It’s simply that his trick, and this is the great
thing, is to invent tables of categories that are utterly, utterly bizarre. But they're still tables...
Godard doesn't have – forgive this rather cheap formula, but I think it's fundamentally true –
Godard doesn't have an editing table, he has a table of categories. And his editing table is his
table of categories.

I'll take a film where this all comes to a head, Sauve qui peut (la vie) [Every Man for Himself
aka Slow Motion, 1980]. Here you have four categories, four main categories.12 So, we say to
ourselves, well then, let's make categories out of this. Aristotle's categories were substance,
quality, quantity... In Godard's Sauve qui peut (la vie), the four main categories are
imagination, fear, commerce and music. But they play the explicit role of categories, namely,
in Godard's work – I'm already saying too much here, but it's just to give you an example…
to give an example where I'd like you to feel this need to relate cinema not only to the other
arts, but to thought and philosophy in general – in Godard's work, categories, literally
speaking, can be given a very strict definition, namely, they are reflexive genres in which
what is reflected is a series of images. This is a serial cinema, but the series of images are
reflected in a reflexive genre, the reflexive genre being a category in itself.

This is why, for each film, he's so ingenious and creative: for each film, he'll remake a new
table of categories corresponding to the film in question. And each time, the images are
reflected in categories that can take on the most diverse forms. In this sense, I can literally
say...

Do you have a class here? I don't understand, they tell me they're going to other rooms...
Well, Miss?

It’s exhausting. What was I saying before, I don’t remember... [The students help him get
back on track]

Yes, in each film, he'll redo his table of categories. Of course, it's up to him to base them on
the series of images. But the series of images will always be reflected in a category, and that's
how he breaks up the narrative. One of the ways he breaks up the narrative is precisely to
make the series of images depend on a reflexive category, meaning a reflexive concept. In
this way, what we have is really a... it's really a relation between cinema and philosophy.

Never mind, all I wanted to say was, let's accept Daney's and Virilio's theses. The ambitions
of the early pioneers to unite the cinematographic image with the image of thought – so this
is similar to my second conclusion – the ambitions of these early pioneers to unite the
cinematographic image with the image of thought may have collapsed for world historical
reasons, which are state propaganda and fascism. We could no longer believe in the art of the
masses, in the new thought as defined by the pioneers, and in universal language.

But then there’s a twist. The new cinema, the post-war cinema, was about to enter into… the
new cinematographic image – and we saw in other years in what ways it was new – the new

cinematographic image was about to enter into a completely new relationship with the image
of thought, and why is that? For a very simple reason: because the image of thought had itself
undergone the same shock. State propaganda, fascism, the organization of fascism hadn't left
the cinematographic image intact, but neither had they left intact the philosophical image of
thought, and on the basis of this double wreckage, a new alliance could be forged between the
new cinematographic image and the new image of thought. What would this new image of
thought be? What would the new cinematographic image be? What was the old one in both
cases? All this will also be part of our program.

So now we're making progress, but then let's start again and ask, in terms of the pioneers, and
this would be my third point – you see, how I'm addressing... I'm very orderly today – we
should ask ourselves what's going on here? How did it come about, in terms of the pioneers –
because we still have a lot to learn. It isn’t enough to invoke fascism or state propaganda to
be able to liquidate Eisenstein, Epstein, Vertov, Élie Faure, Gance – what was it that was able
to bring about an encounter, right from the beginning, between the cinematographic image
and the image of thought, given that this encounter would change its nature after the war and
continue in other forms or under other nuptials? It's essential to consider great filmmakers as
thinkers, you know. Because I really think they are great thinkers.

Well, the answer is quite simple. What brings together the cinematographic image and the
image of thought? My answer, then, will be my third point today – we've already covered
two, we're really galloping along, we won’t be able to go so quickly on future occasions. We
have two points that I'd like you to be able to distinguish clearly in your minds, but I think
they go without saying, today it's all clear, what I’ve said is valid, no questions to ask there.
So, the answer is quite simple, but it's one that will leave us perplexed. It's amazing because I
can't see any other possible answer, and then there's no need to give a reason for this answer.
We shall see… Actually, what underlies the encounter between the cinematographic image
and the image of thought is the automatism of the cinematographic image. That's what we’re
dealing with here. The cinematographic image is au-to-ma-tic. What I'm saying will
inevitably be of relevance to the image of thought. So, an automatic image... [Tape
interrupted; 1:19:39]

... the only image that is automatic. Well, yes, the cinematographic image is the first
automatic image. What do I mean here by “automatic”? I mean that the image – we've seen
this, we looked at it in previous years, I won't go back over it – the cinematographic image is
the movement-image, that is, it doesn't represent someone or something that moves, it moves
in itself, it's automatic. The movement of the cinematographic image is self-movement [automouvement]. Self-movement, it moves in itself, by itself, that's what I call the automatic
character of the cinematographic image. And it's insofar as it is an automatic image that the
cinematographic image solicits the image of thought.13

You'll tell me, this is bizarre. In what way is the automatic character of the cinematographic
image… because it's the only one, a painting is an image that isn't automatic, it doesn't move.
The fact that it is automatic is what is intrinsic to the cinematographic image, its most general
characteristic. It's the image that moves, it's not a real body like the dancer's body. Nor it is a
motionless image, like a painting. It's the automatic image that moves. And I would say that
this in itself is sufficient for it to have an extraordinary relationship with the image of
thought: its automatic character.

That's where the objection comes in, the objection that has existed right from cinema’s very
beginnings. Namely, the whole bunch of idiots who reacted by saying: but that's precisely
why cinema isn't thought. I mean, when you say something, whatever you say, the moment
you try to say something, a whole cloud of idiotic objections descends. I mean, there's no
thought whatsoever that isn't clouded by a whole set of idiotic objections. In fact, this is the
very joy of thought. So, you have two kinds of people: there are those who keep their idiotic
objections to themselves because they sense how dumb they are, and then there are those who
voice them out loud because they believe they are strong objections. Such people are
conceited, because they never stop to think that the objection is so stupid that the person who
came up with the idea they’re objecting to must have made it himself at some point,
otherwise it would be very worrying for them.

An author who was famous at the time of early cinema, and who wrote novels that were in no
way mediocre, novels of some importance even, but who really wasn't a thinker, and whose
name was Georges Duhamel, launched a great critique both against America and American
civilization, and against cinema.14 And he said: “I can no longer think what I want”. That's
interesting; it fascinates me. I quote the text, a part of the text… “I can no longer think what I
want, the moving images…” – so, moving images, that is, automatic images – “the moving
images are substituted for my own thoughts”. It’s not easy to deal with, is it? It's incredible,
let’s read it again. Can you imagine, someone who tells you this: “I can no longer think what
I want”, and you think, well, here's someone who wants to think what he wants. So, he's
either paying attention to what he's saying, or he's not. But it's still interesting to analyze this
text...

[Someone enters the room] Madam? [Laughter]

It seems that the mere sight of this room horrifies them... okay. [Laughter]

Yes, think about it. Someone says to you: cinema prevents me from thinking what I want. If
you think about it, you say, ah well, but then all of a sudden you say to yourself, this guy,
when he’s reading a novel or standing in front of a painting, does he think what he wants
then? It's quite interesting, someone who has this conception of art, that in front of art I can
think what I want. So, in front of a Rembrandt painting, I can think whatever I want, eh? How
odd! What a strange idea.

Try to understand what I’m referring to as an image of thought. There are images of thought
which are completely stupid. If someone says to you: “Oh, cinema bothers me because I can't
think what I want”, it's because they've created a dumb image of thought. Generally speaking,
the ideal for thought is precisely not to think what it wants, meaning to be forced to think
something. Before a painting, a Rembrandt, say, you can't think what you want, it's
unfortunate but that's the way it is. Very unfortunate, but if you want to think what you want,
well, I don't see how you could. I don't know how anyone can think what they want. It's in the
very nature of thought that you can't think what you want. But in the end, this idea that
moving images are “substituted for my own thoughts”, well, that's not bad at all, it doesn't
hurt, and it won't hurt Duhamel.

But here we have an objection: the automatic nature of the cinematographic image, far from
being… far from establishing a relation with thought, destroys the relation with thought. Let's
say that the cinematographic image imposes its thought process on me. Let's accept this, let’s
admit it. Our answer, then, can only be one thing – of course it's obviously more complicated

than this, and we first have to agree on what we mean by “automatic image”. If this is how
we define the specific character of cinema, in what sense is it an automatic image? The first
meaning is technical, I won’t dwell on it but it concerns both recording and projection. This
meaning is very important, it's the technological basis of the image, it's the technological
basis of the automatic image, shooting and projection.

But I would say there's also a second sense, which no longer concerns the technological
means of the image but the image itself. This second meaning may seem incidental, but we
will be led to acknowledge its fundamental importance. Let's start with this incidental aspect.
Is it by chance that cinema, from its very beginnings, has presented us with automata and
puppets in such an insistent, such a constant way… this presentation or this adaptation of
automata to the cinematographic image? You see, this time we're talking about the very
content of the cinematographic image. You'll tell me such content is quite fortuitous. This
naturally remains to be seen. But right from the very beginnings of cinema, automata of all
sorts have pervaded the cinematographic image. Under what form? Under the form of
German Expressionism: golems, sleepwalkers, living automatons, zombies become key
characters in this new art. I don't think it's a matter of chance that solely depends on the
subject. It's not because cinema confronts terror, it's not because... There's something deeper
in the fact that automata of all kinds pertain to the cinematographic image, and in the way
they come to populate it.15

A second example, in parallel to German Expressionism, is the French school. In a
completely different way, it too populates the cinematographic image with automata, this
time presented as inanimate automata, with which it never ceases to engage in confrontation
and exchange. These are no longer the living automata of German Expressionism, what we
have is the perpetually developed, continually inverted relationship between the automaton
and the living being. It's another mode. From the time of Renoir's early silent films, the theme
of the automaton makes its fundamental appearance. This will culminate in La Règle du jeu
[The Rules of the Game, 1939], and Renoir's cinema never ceased being haunted by the
automaton. Or [Jean] Vigo, with L'Atalante [1934], where we have the fundamental presence
of the automaton as a mediator between living characters and from one living character to
another. Again, is this a coincidence of history or genre? No. We begin to suspect that there
must be a deep alliance between the cinematographic image in itself and the automata that
populate it.

And after all, this is only natural, so we have our answer. I'm quite content, straight away we
have a number of responses. If the very essence of the cinematographic image is automatism,
isn't it perfectly normal for the cinematographic image to present us with automata? It's a
simple answer. And here I'm not referring exclusively to early cinema, to pre-war cinema. I'm
taking a leap into modern cinema, even if the relationship between the cinematographic
image and the image... [Tape interrupted; 1:23:12]

... the number of actors. Bresson calls him a cinematographic model, he calls him a
cinematographic model as opposed to theatrical actor. And what's the major difference? What
characterizes… What is the first thing… We'll have to take a much closer look at this later in
the year. What does he call a cinematographic model? But if I take the most constant
characteristic he assigns, the most general aspect he assigns to the cinematographic model,
what is it in Bresson? It's automatism.

I'm not inventing the word. If you take Bresson's little book,16 a classic of cinema writing, not
only do you find a whole chapter entitled "On Automatism", which begins like this: “Ninetenths of our movements obey habit and automatism. It is anti-nature to subordinate them to
will and to thought.” Let’s just stick to this will and thought. In other words, the
cinematographic model, unlike the stage actor, must neither will nor think, he's an automaton.
What kind of automaton? And this is where Bresson is neither a German Expressionist nor
part of the French school; he will undoubtedly be a spiritual automaton, and yet he doesn't
think. Very odd. We'll come to see how complicated Bresson's notion of the automaton is.17

But what I remember is… I want to read another extract, page 32 – but you have this all
through Notes on the Cinematographer – where he speaks of models, cinematographic
models: “Your models… will get used to the gestures they have repeated twenty times…” –
he's talking to himself, there's a hint of something happening here – "your models, pitched
into the action of your film, will get used to the gestures they have repeated twenty times…
Your models, pitched into the action of your film, will get used to the gestures they have
repeated twenty times. The words they have learned with their lips will find, without their
minds' taking part in this, the inflections and the lilt proper to their true natures…” – so
automata have a nature – “A way of recovering the automatism of real life... a way of
recovering the automatism of real life”. So Bresson, in his conception of the cinematographic
model, never ceases – and this is what I want you to retain – to claim an automatism that is
different from both the automaton of the French school and the living automaton of German
Expressionism, but which is nonetheless, in its turn, a type of automaton.

Thirdly… remember, not only does automatism concern the technological means of the
cinematographic image but it also concerns the content of the cinematographic image itself.
And thirdly, it concerns the highest form of the cinematographic image. And in what sense
would that be? I mean that it affects the aesthetic form of the cinematographic image, or if
you prefer, the way it is perceived and thought. Why is this? The answer is simple, at least
the one the first great pioneers of cinema will give us. It seems to me that, despite their
differences, the early pioneers of cinema had a similar overarching answer: the automatic
image, the automatic material image of cinema, has as its correlate a spiritual automatism, a
mental automatism, or an automatic subjectivity.

It’s odd, isn’t it? The real correlate of the cinema image as an automatic image is an
intrinsically spiritual or mental automatism, or an automatic subjectivity. Thanks to the
cinematographic image, thanks to the automatic image, cinema gives rise to the spiritual
automaton within us. Ahhh! What a discovery! What is this spiritual automaton? The art of
the masses gives rise to the spiritual automaton. What a great idea! What a beautiful idea, if
you know what it refers to, but you have to let yourself succumb to the beauty of an idea
before you can know what it means.

Here's a text by Élie Faure, page 56, listen carefully, because you'll find something in it: “It is
in fact its material automatism” – that of cinema – “it is in fact its material automatism that
gives rise, inside these images, to this new universe which it gradually imposes on our
intellectual automatism”. You see, the spiritual automaton is the direct correlate of the
automatic image. And Élie Faure continues: “Thus there appears, in a blinding light, the
subordination of the human soul to the tools which it creates” – the tool being the technical
means of the cinematographic image – “Thus there appears, in a blinding light, the
subordination of the human soul to the tools which it creates and vice versa.”18 There is

therefore an action of the automatic image upon the spiritual automaton, and a reaction of the
spiritual automaton upon the automatic image.

Epstein, in Écrits sur le cinéma19 says the same thing, in other words: the automatic image of
cinema has as its correlate an “automatic subjectivity”. This automatic subjectivity is the
camera. The camera is automatic subjectivity. Okay, and it's from this, I think, that they will
develop their ideas that cinema is a new form of thought, that it's an art of the masses, and a
universal language. Look at the reason, the foundation of these three aspects: it's because the
cinematographic image is an automatic image that, far from preventing us from thinking, it
revives in us the old dream, that archaic dream that only cinema would be able to accomplish,
the dream of a spiritual automaton.20

Spiritual automaton, spiritual automaton, so that's what it is. Cinema wouldn't just be the
automatic image, it would be the correlate of the automatic image and the image of thought –
in other words, the correlation of the automatic image and the spiritual automaton that
corresponds to it. You might well ask, but is being reduced to the state of a spiritual
automaton a good thing? Of course, it's a good thing, clearly it is a good thing. But why is it
good? Because it's always been our dream, or at least it's always been the dream of thought.
This is what Duhamel was unaware of, that it's always been the dream of thought, an
automaton who cries out. But why? That's what we need to look at now. In what sense would
this be the dream of thought?

In other words, since up to now we've been dealing with the cinematographic image, let's
move on to the other side, the image of thought. Does the image of thought have anything to
do with the phenomenon of automatism? I'd say it doesn't just have something to do with it, it
has two things to do with it. This is my fourth point today. How are you doing? Are you
keeping up? It's important that you’re able to follow the connections too, wouldn’t you say?
So, any problems? Are you following me? You can tell me next time. Okay, what time is it
now?

Lucien Gouty: Eleven forty, quarter to twelve.

Deleuze: Shall we take a little break, so you can smoke your noxious cigarettes? But not for
long, mind. [Noise of chairs, tape interrupted; 1:45:21]

… So these points all follow on from one another. My fourth point would be that it's not clear
what the relation between thought and automatism is. Okay, let's now focus on this question
of thought. It's not clear at all. Why is that? Because these relationships are twofold. What is
automatism in relation to thought? You don’t have any questions on the other three points, do
you? After all my drudgery, you’ve no questions? In other words, is that all quite clear?
Okay.

So, this first relation, what does it concern? It’s to do with the extent to which automatism
designates all the unconscious mechanisms of thought, the mental-organic mechanisms. And
let's suppose – for the moment these are just hypotheses that we’ll fine-tune at a later stage –
we call "automatism" all these unconscious mental-organic mechanisms in relation to
thought. In other words, here automatism refers to pure matter, special matter, mental-organic
matter that conscious thought has the task of integrating, organizing and dominating, but
which can reveal itself on its own and take thought by surprise. I'm not sure there is such a
composite, because what would we include in it? We would include, for example, dreams,

oneirism – but what are called oneiroid relations… it's not even clear that oneirism and
oneiroid relations belong in the same category or can be grouped together in the same
category – and then all kinds of disorders which, when they are uncovered, manifest thought
mechanisms that are no longer controlled, nor even controllable, by thought itself, such as
flight of ideas and other such phenomena. In other words, is there a category capable of
grouping all these unconscious thought mechanisms, however varied they may be?

In 1899, a great psychiatrist – and I stress the date, 1899, this is the period when cinema was
invented, so I'm not comparing things that are quite different, quite far aprt in history – in
1899, the great psychiatrist Pierre Janet, j-a-n-e-t, wrote a seminal book, L'automatisme
psychologique,21 in which he considers what he calls total automatism, psychological
automatism, total automatism – namely catalepsy, somnambulism, suggestion – and on the
other hand, partial automatism – namely hysterical anesthesia and paralysis, idée fixe,
hallucination, possession. And he concludes that it's possible – you see how dreaming doesn't
come into it – he thinks that it's possible to construct a consistent concept of psychological
automatism. Around the same time...

[Someone enters the room]

Ah, so you have a new class here?

[Response from the student who enters; laughter]

Wait. Well, she was polite at least... [Tape interrupted; 1:52:40]

Another great 19th-century psychiatrist, who went by the much prettier name of Gaëtan de
Clérambault, c-l-é-r-a-m-b-a-u-l-t… I think that's how it’s written. Clérambault coined the
notion of "mental automatism". And Clérambault's mental automatism was very different
from Janet's psychological automatism. Because, far from basing the unity of this automatism
on psychological character, he claimed the primacy of an organic-neurological basis that fed
hallucinatory psychosis, and that triggered a reaction, or perhaps it didn’t – but in any case,
this would already be sufficient for our purposes – that provoked or might have provoked a
mental reaction, or as he calls it a personality-based reaction. What's more, this mental,
personality-based reaction could precede – Clérambault can be quite complicated – could
precede its organic-neurological basis, corresponding to a state of paranoid psychosis. And
then there were many other things. But you see how mental automatism would include both a
neurological, an organic-neurological basis, and a mental reaction, meaning a personalitybased reaction to this basis.

Well, we'll have to take a closer look, which is why, among all the directions our work will
take, I'd like to point out that Clérambault's psychiatric work has recently been republished by
Presses Universitaires under the title Œuvres psychiatriques, whereas I think Janet's
L'automatisme psychologique you can only find second-hand or in libraries. So there you
have it, but for those interested in this aspect of the great psychiatry of the 19th century, I
recommend reading both these authors, who are the greatest of the great. 22

At the same time, what’s going on here? We can't restrict ourselves to psychiatry, but if I
consider it from a psychiatric point of view, my question is simply this (and here I'm not
really moving forward, it's merely to group the questions): can we consider automatism,
either in its psychological form – Janet – or in its mental form – Clérambault – as something

that groups together a whole set of unconscious thought mechanisms? I have to continue
here, because after all, in a completely different field – though I'm not trying to mix things up
– in literature, two things were occurring that appeared to be quite new: on one hand, the
Surrealists had developed a form of writing they called "automatic writing". A bridge was
established – since I can't speak of it as a model – by [André] Breton and [Paul] Eluard, and
also by [Salvador] Dali, who considered automatic writing to be closely related to certain
phenomena that concerned psychiatry. To the point that Breton and Eluard presented books
of automatic writing as veritable simulations of delirium and psychosis, while Salvador Dali,
at the peak of his thought, claimed to have instituted and invented – I think these are the most
powerful texts Dali wrote – a method of his own, in which he claims to go even further than
the automatic writing of the Surrealists, and which he calls the method of “critical paranoia”.

Critical paranoia? Automatic writing? What does all this mean? This is a kind of writing that
undoubtedly claims to follow or to express the unconscious mechanisms of thought. But that
would be a very inadequate definition, because oddly enough – and we don't yet understand
why, but we'll have to look into it this year – oddly enough, they stress that this is not
uncontrolled writing. What type of control would be appropriate for the expression of
unconscious thought mechanisms? For the moment, we have no idea. All I’m saying is that it
isn’t uncontrolled writing. They all claim the element of control, starting with Dali, since he
doesn't create paranoia, he uses paranoia critically. Paranoia becomes a method he uses to
critique the world and its appearances. Okay.

In a completely different direction, something called the “interior monologue” was emerging
in literature. Interior monologue claimed to be the literary expression of what was called
"stream of consciousness", or more precisely the "subconscious stream of consciousness". Of
course, interior monologue was not the same thing as automatic writing. Still, there was a
rivalry of ambition: to capture unconscious or subconscious mechanisms of thought while
subjecting them to literary control. And the interior monologue burst onto the scene with
[James] Joyce, first in Ulysses, and then, in a more radically advanced form, in Finnegans
Wake.

People say about Joyce's inner monologue something Joyce himself remarked about it – and
this shows how we should always be suspicious of authors’ pronouncements, not that they lie
exactly, but they do like to joke. It's always said – and it's striking how often this gets
repeated without delving into the matter – that the interior monologue, as Joyce himself
acknowledged, had a precedent in an obscure French novelist named Edouard Dujardin, who
wrote a little book of interior monologues entitled Les lauriers sont coupés [1888], which
was republished in paperback. And Joyce pays tribute to Dujardin.23

When great authors, when authors of genius, are being modest, they love to tease people by
invoking ancestors to whom they give great credit, but you shouldn't take their word for it. If
you read Les lauriers sont coupés – and we will also have to look at this because it’s
something that bothers me, so often is it referred to… “Ah, the interior monologue, it's almost
automatic... Joyce's predecessor is…” – but in my view, though don't take my word for it
either, Dujardin's use of interior monologue has absolutely nothing to do with the way Joyce
was already using it in Ulysses, so there's no filiation, in my view, between Joyce and
Dujardin. On the other hand, I would say that, if Joyce pays tribute to Dujardin, it’s in order
to hide his true sources, meaning all this is just teasing. His real sources are much more
philosophical. He was well read in philosophy and his real sources come from William

James, Henry James's brother, and from his celebrated conception of stream of consciousness
and its expression. So we're really going to have to look at all of that.

Anyway, regarding this first aspect of automatism, what we have is already quite rich, if I
define automatism as all the unconscious mechanisms of thought together with the problem
of their expression. We have psychiatric elements, actually two psychiatric elements, and two
literary elements that overlap and somehow correspond in this sense. That makes four
elements. So, what is the bombshell for us here? It’s the question of how all this connects to
the cinematographic image. What's more, in this encounter with the cinematographic image,
it’s the cinematographic image that dominates: what literature has attempted to do, cinema
can do better. And this will be the great encounter between the cinematographic image and
the image of thought in terms of its automatism, the unconscious mechanisms of thought.

And indeed, Surrealism-inspired cinema, cinema inspired by Surrealism will claim to
constitute a genuine automatic writing that has the advantage of being both visual and sonic,
surpassing the possibilities of literature in this respect. And the first Surrealist film… – this
was already true of Entr'acte, the first attempt in this direction… Entr'acte, a film by René
Clair… – but the first great Surrealist film before Un chien andalou [1929] is, as Artaud
reminds us, Germaine Dulac’s film of his screenplay, The Seashell and the Clergyman
[1928], the great Artaud-Dulac film, which Artaud presents under the sign of automatic
writing, but an automatic writing that has become visual and sonorous as much as written,
proceeding by images… what am I saying? You’re right, it's silent… a writing that proceeds
by visual images, a writing addressed to sight, an automatic writing addressed to sight.24

But much more than this, the interior monologue… and this seems to me very important.
Because it was Eisenstein who, in a very powerful homage to Joyce, seized on the idea of the
interior monologue and launched his great theme, which I don't think he would ever abandon:
not only does cinema proceed by interior monologue, but it is infinitely superior to literature
in its ability to conjure interior monologue. True interior monologue is something only
cinema can accomplish.25

What does Eisenstein mean by this? He's saying something that, at first sight, appears quite
simple: that interior monologue in literature, à la Joyce, still depends on the language barrier,
it still depends on the limit that a national language presents. Mind you, this is only partly
true. But it would still have to go beyond the limit of national languages. Yet, can literature
actually do this? Not in Ulysses, no, not in Bloom's great interior monologue. But in
Finnegans Wake, words begin to appear there that no longer belong to a national language,
words that call on several languages, not to mention an infinite use of portmanteau
constructions. And Finnegans Wake already represents a kind of incredible, a quite
astounding attempt to push literature beyond the limit of a given national language. Okay.
But at the same time, it's still limited, it's limited by its linguistic form. And here Eisenstein
can say that in cinema, interior monologue is no longer subordinated to any national language
barrier, as a silent film shows.

It simply marks an evolution – I'd say before 1935 and certainly from 1935 onwards. We'll
see how in my view, Eisenstein's theory of interior monologue becomes fundamental. It's as
fundamental to cinema as it is to philosophy. In a first period prior to 1935, it seems very odd
to me that Eisenstein – you'll find all the texts in this regard in Le film, sa forme, son sens, in
the 1976 French translation published by Bourgois – before 1935, Eisenstein still regards the
interior monologue as the cinematographic expression of a character's thoughts, the

expression of a character's subconscious thoughts and the subconscious mechanisms of these
thoughts. He takes as an example his plan for an adaptation. He had been wanting to adapt an
American novel by [Theodore] Dreiser, An American Tragedy. And he says, you see
Dreiser’s attempts at interior monologue… If you compare Dreiser's interior monologue with
my project, you'll see that I clearly go much further, since I am free to link preconscious and
subconscious ideas and mix these with a character's sensations, memories, plans, etc., and
thus create a kind of stream of consciousness for the character. I'd say that here, the interior
monologue has already crossed the language barrier, but nonetheless it remains dependent on
a subjective cinema… what's going on in the character’s mind.

What happened in 1935? I say this because it’s all relevant to how we’re going to plan the
year today. I say this because I believe that in 1935, Eisenstein was half forced, half prepared
to improvise a speech. It's his famous 1935 speech. Why famous? Because, without really
expecting it – though he must have had an inkling that it would happen – Eisenstein, at a
symposium of Soviet filmmakers, found himself for the first time officially prey to the
Stalinists’ wide-ranging criticisms, and in this speech, which I imagine was more or less halfimprovised, he shows… I don't know how to put it… both a courage and a prudence that I
find quite admirable. The way he gets away with it, in fact… it's not that the others… the
others are in no way stupid, they make fundamental objections to him, but these objections
appear to be purely cinematographic… it's a fascinating text. Everyone knows what’s really
at stake everyone understands what the stakes are, namely that Stalin has his eye on you, and
if you keep on doing what you're doing, you'll see what the consequences will be. Eisenstein's
response is brilliant. It's very, very cautious. He says: of course, you're right, you're right, you
don't know how right you are, but this doesn’t obscure the fact that in a way, it's exactly what
I've done that permits you to be right today, and so on. Well, it's a diabolically clever
response. You should all study this text closely.26

But what interests me for the moment is that, in the 1935 speech alone, the interior
monologue is elevated to a new power. It no longer serves… it no longer refers to the
cinema's ability to give expression to what's going on in a character's head. It becomes a
device suitable for the film as a whole. It is the entire film that presents itself as an interior
monologue, no longer an interior monologue that takes place in the character's head, but an
interior monologue that is as much that of the author as it is the spectator, pertaining to both
at the same time. In other words, it is the film itself. The interior monologue is the film. It's
the whole of the film, to the point where he tells us – and this should interest us regarding our
problem of thought – that what he calls “intellectual cinema”– though we don't yet know
what this refers to – intellectual cinema finds its natural correlate in the interior monologue.
The interior monologue is the correlate of intellectual cinema.

That is why I have to insist on this point – since it's one we'll have to consider this year –
when the branch of semiology inspired by linguistics denounced Eisenstein's hasty
conception of the relationship between cinema and the language system, or cinema and
language, I wonder if, at root, they didn't completely misunderstand what Eisenstein meant
by interior monologue. Because what seems obvious to me, however little I want to say about
it for the moment – because that will be for a future occasion when I examine the relationship
between cinema and language – what seems clear to me is that, for Eisenstein, the interior
monologue is neither simply a language system nor a language. So this future alternative that
linguistic semiology will present, between language system and language, does not arise.
They tried to catch Eisenstein in their own pincers, between language system and language,

pincers they borrowed from [Ferdinand de] Saussure. But none of this is Eisenstein's
problem, not at all.

I’d say that for Eisenstein, I'd say, although this isn’t yet fully comprehensible… but that's
okay, maybe it'll become clear later… for Eisenstein, the interior monologue was neither a
language system nor a language. It was a noetic matter – noetic meaning that it concerns
thought – a noetic matter correlative to both language system and language, and prior to any
distinction between the two. So that far from reproaching Eisenstein for his ingenuous
conception of this problem, it would almost be more apt to reproach linguistics-inspired
semiology for its naive and too generally applied conception, a kind of application of
linguistic givens to a problem that had nothing to do with them. Eisenstein's problem is
similar to that of certain linguists who have nothing to do with Saussure, the need to discover
a specific matter, an intrinsic matter that is not yet either a language system nor a language
and that pre-exists either of them – that pre-exists de jure and not only de facto – that de jure
pre-exists the distinction between language system and language, and that constitutes their
raw material. And the interior monologue is this raw material.

It is in terms of a raw material that pre-exists the distinction between language system and
language, and that therefore pre-exists both, that we must pose the problem of the relation
between cinema and language system, or between cinema and language. As proof of this, I
quote one of the masters of linguistics, [Roman] Jakobson, who at least had the merit, in the
interview he gave on cinema, of saying something that has always struck me... and he says it
in one sentence. He says nothing about Eisenstein being naive. That’s not what he says. He
says: if there's one thing I find interesting, it's Eisenstein's conception of the interior
monologue, where he claims Joyce as an influence. And he says this as a linguist. What is
this matter that is neither language system nor language, and yet is presupposed by both
language system and language? I'd say that this matter – and for the moment this is all we can
say about it – is the interior monologue. For the moment, it’s not important if all this seems a
bit obscure.27

But there again, I'm just regrouping things. There's an automatism… you see, there's an
automatism of thought that can be very loosely defined by all of its unconscious and
subconscious mechanisms. And in fact, the cinematographic image, simply because it is
automatic – you see my answer is quite straightforward… I'm justifying the way I invoked
the image’s automatism – it's precisely because it is automatic, that the cinematographic
image has, from the outset, sensed that its true vocation is to take on board the unconscious
mechanisms of thought that we commonly group together under the name of psychological or
mental automatism. There's a whole lineage of filmmakers that emerges with this change of
regime in cinema. If I jump to the most modern, for example, [Orson] Welles seems to me to
be a genius of hallucinatory cinema, and so too is [Alain] Resnais, though in a completely
different way. So this problem isn’t going to end with the pioneers, it will change, there will
be mutations. But right from the start, cinema recognized a vocation to express the
unconscious mechanisms of thought, and thus mental and psychological automatism.
Precisely because its image was automatic, it was destined to reproduce psychological or
mental automatism.

So now let me mention briefly what we'll be starting with next time. I'm still concerned with
the relationship between automatism and thought… and there's another completely different
pole to automatism in its relation to thought. This time, automatism will no longer refer to all
the unconscious or subconscious mechanisms of mental-organic thought. So, what will it

refer to? This time, it will refer to the higher order of a pure logic, the formal order of
thoughts that spills over into thought and consciousness itself. It's no longer the unconscious
or the subconscious, it's the supra-conscious. Really? Well, yes! And it’s here that philosophy
will find the purest image of thought.

As early as the 17th century, the royal century, a most unusual expression appeared: "spiritual
automaton", or automaton spirituale, in a barbaric tongue combining Greek and Latin terms.
The automaton spirituale, this splendid thing, this splendid concept of the spiritual
automaton, appears in the writings of [Baruch] Spinoza. Considering his Jewish tradition,
was he thinking of something like the Golem, a Golem in thought, the great Golem? Well,
we're no longer talking about unconscious thought mechanisms such as dreams or daydreams.
So what are we talking about? It concerns the formal order. Now listen carefully, it doesn't
matter if you don't understand this yet… you will, don't fret, you have to listen first, long
before you can understand, maybe you’ll understand this in three months’ time, okay? It’s the
formal order, the spiritual automaton is the formal order by which thoughts are deduced from
one another, independently of their object and independently of any reference to their object.
Ah, you'll ask me, what does that mean? Does something like that exist? But you know very
well that it exists, even if you don't practice it yourself and don't know how it's practiced.
Demonstrative thought has never been anything other than this – I mean theorematic
thought… The sequence of theorems has never been anything other than the formal order by
which thoughts are deduced from one another independently of any reference to their object.

I mean, you deduce something from the idea of a triangle independently of whether or not
there are actual triangles. Whether there are triangles or no triangles is of no importance.
Theorematic demonstration has the effect of linking thoughts together from a purely formal
point of view. You'll tell me, we still have figures, we still have the figure of a triangle and so
on, so we can go further. And modern logic will perfect this, on one hand under the name of
"logistics", and then under another name – which is justified because it differs from logistics
– that of “axiomatics”. And axiomatics will indeed refer to a sequence of thoughts, a formal
sequence independent of their content. The highest form of thought, insofar as it links idea
with idea, independently of any reference to the object, is the spiritual automaton. The
spiritual automaton was realized in the demonstrative order of theorems, then in the order of
deduction, that of logistics, then in the order of axiomatics and the development of
axiomatics.

Well see that for Spinoza – we'll have to look very closely at the text, which is very, very
odd… this text of Spinoza’s in which he proposes the idea of the spiritual automaton as a
supra-conscious thought – it is consciousness that depends on the way that thoughts are
linked... there's a thought-consciousness inversion. It is no longer thought that depends on
consciousness, it is consciousness that flows from thought. Consciousness will be the result of
the formal linkage of ideas by thought, independently of any reference to the object. It is this
great Spinozist reversal that drives the spiritual automaton. Now, there’s no way a formula as
great as that of the spiritual automaton would be able to arise in philosophy without Leibniz
immediately seizing upon it. For once, Leibniz, who otherwise borrowed little from Spinoza,
immediately borrows the idea of the spiritual automaton from him, for the simple reason that
Leibniz, who created a true science of logistics, was even in his own time pushing to its limit
the idea of a formalism of thought, whose ideas would be linked up in terms of what he called
a "universal characteristic". In this new science that two centuries, three centuries later,
would give rise to logistics, in this new Leibnizian science of the universal characteristic, the

whole of this science is placed under the sign of the mental automaton, the spiritual
automaton.

Going back to the 20th century, there’s a book that remains quite unusual, a book we’ll have
to take a closer look at, and that at the time seemed extraordinarily new, though, in my view,
it simply pushes this classical ideal of the spiritual automaton to its limit. This is Valéry's
Monsieur Teste.28 And Monsieur Teste is the spiritual automaton, or the mental automaton.
It’s a book which had a profound impact at the beginning of the 20th century, I don't
remember exactly when it was written, but it’s one of Paul Valéry’s best-known books, where
he presents the spiritual automaton under the explicit name of Monsieur Teste. For what is
Monsieur Teste? As Valéry puts it, Monsieur Teste is proof. And what is the mechanism of
proof? It's the formal concatenation of ideas that flow from one another. Monsieur Teste, says
Valéry, is someone who affirms, posits and gives autonomy to thought, and is the bearer of a
form of thought that feeds on its own substance. Far from being a mathematical delusion of
Valéry, who was always dreaming of mathematics, it seems to me that Monsieur Teste is the
culmination of 17th-century classical thought.

So, you might say, here's a second sense. You see, there are two senses in which automatism
relates to thought. On one hand there’s an automatism in the sense of the unconscious or
subconscious mechanisms of thought, and on the other hand, there’s the formal order of
thoughts that connect to one another independently of consciousness. So we have an infraconsciousness and a supra-consciousness. Earlier on, I was asking whether or not there was
an encounter between cinema and the first sense, that of mental automatism… and our
immediate answer was yes, yes, by virtue of the automatic nature of the cinematographic
image. My second question will have exactly the same response, only the variables in this
case won't be the same. I'd say yes, there's a fundamental encounter between the
cinematographic image and this new image of thought, that of the higher spiritual automaton.
How pale and meagre and weak George Duhamel's objection seems to us now. It's precisely
because cinema is capable of establishing and bringing to life the spiritual automaton that it
has a fundamental relationship with thought. And why does the cinematographic image
encounter this second aspect of automatism, no longer psychological automatism, but mental
or spiritual automatism, higher automatism? For the same reason as before, because it is an
automatic image.

It must be understood, nonetheless, that there are two aspects to the automatic image. What
will occur under the second aspect? Can we speak of a theorematic cinema? Is it essential to
cinema, or are we just speaking of a few cinematographic monstrosities? Yes, we can speak
of a theorematic cinema. Yes, yes, yes, yes... I can’t imagine that Pasolini, in calling one of
his films Theorem [1968], did so arbitrarily, that he didn't think the title through. Pasolini
produced at least two masterpieces of theorematic cinema, one entitled Theorem and the other
entitled Salò [1975], s-a-l-o. Just as I'm not sure that Bresson's entire oeuvre isn't a cinema of
the spiritual automaton. Well, we’ll have to look at all of this.

But what we need to understand first, and next time we're here we can summarize this and
see if there’s anything still to clarify in what we've done today… I'd like you to remember,
because we proceeded in a very, very orderly fashion. If you don't retain this order… it
doesn't matter if you don't yet understand this point or that point… what you have to
understand is the order of our approach, and for each step I've already suggested a short
bibliography. So, we'll be taking things up from there: from this second automatism in its
relation to cinema. [End of the session; 2:34:30]

Notes

  Deleuze brings up Aristotle's "cry" in session 1 of the first seminar on Leibniz, April 15, 1980.
  Deleuze begins chapter 8 of The Time-Image with this phrase, referring to it as "the formula of philosophical
reversal", p. 189. See also the following session, where Deleuze attributes it to Kierkegaard.
  See Artaud, The Theatre and Its Double (New York: Grove Press, 1958).
  For references to these authors, see notably Abel Gance, “La musique de la lumière,” in L’Art du cinéma, ed.
Pierre Lherminier (Paris: Éditions Seghers, 1960), 163-67; Sergei Eisenstein, Non-Indifferent Nature (1945-47),
trans. Herbert Marshall (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988); Jean Epstein, Écrits sur le cinéma,
1921-1953, volume I (Paris: Seghers, 1974); and Élie Faure, History of Art, vol. 4, Modern Art, trans. Walter
Pach (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1921; 1924), and Fonction du cinéma (Paris: Plon, 1953; Denoël, 1981).
  See Serge Daney, La rampe, Paris: Cahiers du cinéma/Gallimard, 1983. See the website “Serge Daney in
English” https://sergedaney.blogspot.com/2013/08/la-rampe.html (accessed 22 June 2025). See also Jean-Louis
Schefer, The Ordinary Man of Cinema, trans. Max Cavitch, Paul Grant, and Noura Wedell (South Pasadena CA:
Semiotext(e) 2016). On Schefer, see session 8 of the Cinéma 3 seminar, January 17, 1984, and Time-Image, pp.
168-169, 201, 263, 267, 312 note 39. On Daney, see Time-Image, p. 164.
  See The Time-Image, pp. 156-157.
  Deleuze presents this quotation from Faure in The Time-Image, p. 308, note 3. See reference in note 5 above.
   On Deleuze's relationship with Daney, see the chapter "Letter to Serge Daney: Optimism, Pessimism and
Travel" in Negotiations (trans. Martin Joughin), New York: Columbia UP, 1995, pp. 68-79.
  Paul Virilio, War and Cinema. The Logistics of Perception, trans. Patrick Camiller (New York: Verso, 2009).
On Virilio's theses, see The Time-Image, p. 309, note 16.
   On Nazi propaganda and cinema, see session 13 of the seminar Cinéma 3, March 13, 1984.
   Paris: Gallimard, 1947.
   On this subject, see The Time-Image, pp. 185-188.
   At the beginning of chapter 7 of The Time-Image, Deleuze introduces the concept of the "spiritual
automaton", borrowing it from Élie Faure, p. 156.
   Quoting Duhamel on this subject in The Time-Image, p. 166, Deleuze offers no reference, though the text may
come from Scenes from the Life of the Future (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1931).
   On this subject, see The Time-Image, p.166, and The Movement-Image, p. 53. See also the seminars Cinema 1
and 2, where Deleuze considers German Expressionism and the French school.
   Notes on the Cinematographer, trans. Jonathan Griffin (London: Quartet, 1986).
   On Bresson and the automaton, see The Time-Image, p. 194 and p. 313, note 42.
   Deleuze presents this quotation in The Time-Image, p. 308, note 1.
   Jean Epstein, Écrits sur le cinema (Paris: Seghers, 1974), vol. II, p. 63.
   Deleuze presents this quotation from Epstein in The Time-Image, p. 308, note 1.
   Pierre Janet, L’Automatisme psychologique (Paris: Alcan, 1889); Catalepsy, Memory, and Suggestion in
Psychological Automatism, eds Giuseppe Craparo and Onno van der Hart, trans. Adam Crabtree and Sarah
Osei-Bonsu (London: Routledge, 2022).
   Deleuze examines Clérambault in session 11 of the seminar on Leibniz and the Baroque, March 3, 1987.
   Edouard Dujardin, Les Lauriers sont coupés (1887; Paris: Editions Messeen, 1925 ; 10/18, 1968).
   Deleuze talks about Clair and Entr’acte in session 18 of the Cinema 3 seminar, May 15, 1984. See also The
Time-Image, p. 57.
   On this subject, see The Time-Image, pp. 158-159.
   This is apparently the text "Film Form: New Problems," reprinted in Film Form: Essays in Film Theory, trans.
Jay Leda (New York: Harvest/HBJ, 1977), where Eisenstein’s Dreiser adaptation is also discussed. See The
Time-Image, p. 308, note 4.
   On Eisenstein and linguistics, see The Time-Image, p. 29 and pp. 286-287, note 9. Deleuze quotes Jakobson in
"Entretien sur le cinéma," in Dominique Noguez, ed. Cinéma, théories, lectures (Paris: Klincksieck, 1973).
   Paul Valéry, Monsieur Teste, trans. Jackson Mathews (New York: Knopf, 1947).