1

Gilles Deleuze
Seminar on Cinema, Truth, and Time: The Falsifier, 1983-1984
Lecture 15, 27 March 1984 (Cinema Course 59)
Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Jennifer Simonet; Revision: Natacha Musléra (Part 1),
Hammurabi Rubio Parra (Part 2) and Stéphanie Mpoyo Ilunga (Part 3); Additional
revisions to the transcription and time stamp, Charles J. Stivale
Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1

Deleuze: So I would prefer, yes... things regarding the gallop, you must have plenty of
examples... There's someone who just told me she had some. Where is she? Where is she?
Ah! I would prefer, if you don't mind, as I have another text, I have a text on the gallop too...
that we keep it for when we come back, okay?

Student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: You won’t forget the idea, will you? Or is it very brief... your idea?

Student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: You don't like to speak in public? Wonderful! You know, I don't think anyone does,
aside from a few crazy people who speak all the time. You are perfectly normal. Because
public speaking can only be justified by serious professional reasons related to the salary
system, otherwise… So, you can give me a little note! Do you like writing notes?

Student: Yes, if you like…

Deleuze: Yes!

Student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: To the link between refrain and polyphony? Yes, yes. So, does it bother you to
voice it orally? Because you don't like talking, right?

Student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: So, you're going to give me a little note on that.

Student: [Inaudible remarks] ... but in public I don't know...

Deleuze: Ah, orally, just for my ears! Ah, right! I didn't understand... I said to myself, what
does she want? I didn't understand, I said to myself, so what does she want? No, listen, if you
don't mind... Is it easier for you to write it?

Student: I don't express myself well in French so...

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes… I don't care if it's just a draft.

Student: I prefer to do it orally.

                                                                                                     2

Deleuze: Oh well! Listen, we can sort this out when we come back next term. But you
mustn't forget your idea. So, you’ll tell me orally...

Student: Okay.

Deleuze: And then I'll respond to you. Well, okay. So, Éric, tell me, does that suit you? How
do we go about this? Is it you who’s going to begin, or shall I? I'd rather say what I have to
say... and then you can add some things on Saint Augustine, okay? Is that okay? So, we need
to go quite fast.

Here we have, very precisely, three points, three points to look at, not in total, three points to
look at to begin with, that is to say to finish with this business of time and the movement of
the soul. I want to clearly distinguish them because it is our only chance to get through this.
The first point regards the question we looked at last time concerning nûn… nûn, which like
all words, all Greek words obviously poses enormous translation problems… Like all Greek
words, it is very, very difficult. Those who have studied Latin will recognize that in Latin
they have the same root in the form nunc which is taken from... which is formed from... nûn,
which is to say the now. So, while the Latins say nunc, the Greeks say nûn. This is the now,
but the now in what sense? Because there are many other words that we can use to say the
now…

So... So, we had an idea... though it doesn't apply to all the senses of the word. So, what
would nûn be in a certain sense? It would be... Let's try to translate it like this: the instant, but
not just any instant. Literally not just any instant. So, what is the instant of which we would
say that it is not just any instant? We would call such an instant a privileged instant. So Nûn,
in a certain sense… one of its meanings would be the privileged instant. The privileged
instant… but what do we mean by privileged? In what way is it privileged? We don't really
need to spend much time on this question. Why not? Because we already know the answer.
We have seen how the Greeks defined extensive movement, local movement, transport from
one place to another, in terms of privileged positions, whether these were cardinal points or
zodiacal signs, or whether they were privileged points on planes that are parallel,
perpendicular, or oblique to each other and which constitute the planetarium.

So extensive movement is marked by privileged points, privileged positions of the moving
body. And we have seen how this was the way extensive movement constituted its own order
in philosophy, which considered movement as world movement, and which, from that point
on, would derive time from movement in the form: time is the number or the measure of the
world’s movement. So, there are privileged positions.

So, in the same way, there are also privileged positions in the intensive movement of the soul.
We call these privileged positions the nûn. Okay. I insist on this: even if I translate nûn as
privileged moment, I don't consider it in terms of time – or even privileged instant − I don't
mean time. Here I use instant in the sense of instance, instare: that which stands or keeps
within itself. And that’s what we say, but then where do these nûn come from, since they
don't presuppose time?

Our answer was very simple: all powers – since what the Neoplatonists offer us is a dialectic
of powers – I won't come back to that − all powers coexist, in various capacities, according to
the degree of power under consideration. In various capacities, they are all caught up inside
each other. The late Neoplatonists will employ a splendid term to describe this: complicatio.

                                                                                                 3

All degrees of power become complicated within each other. And this co-presence of all the
degrees of power belongs to eternity, that is, to the aîon. You notice how I don't include time
in this.

Ah, but, but, but… we have seen that all these degrees of power, all these powers, the degrees
of power, what are they? To remind you, it's important, they are very strictly defined.
Otherwise, you would be doing Nietzsche. You must avoid all these dangers. You must not
Nietzschify the Neoplatonists. Alas! they had nothing to... − not alas, by the way − they had
nothing to do with him, did they? What we can call degree of power in terms of
Neoplatonism is always the One, with a capital O, right? The One to such and such a power,
One to the power of N, One to the power of n, One to the power of n-1, to the power of n-2,
to the power of n-3. This is what constitutes the serial dialectic of the Neoplatonists.

So, if all the degrees of power… none of this is worth... I mean, everything I say would be
ridiculous, or completely arbitrary, if you didn’t attach the definitions I propose. Even if you
do attach the definitions I propose, at that point, let's say it's still debatable, it's arguable,
right? Why not... if you want to. But you mustn't neglect the definitions, otherwise it loses all
meaning.

Well, I would say that this co-presence of all degrees of power in the aîon does not exclude
that they distinguish themselves from one another. I don't say that they are distinct. I say that
they distinguish themselves. There is a “self-distinction” that is one with an internal
distinction. They are not distinct in the sense that the parts of an extensive quantity are
distinct. The parts of an extensive quantity distinguish themselves, to continue in Latin for the
joy of it: partes extra partes, each part being external to another part. This is not the case with
degrees of power. If they distinguish themselves, they distinguish themselves only from
within, and internal distinction consists in a self-distinction, in a being in the process of selfdistinction.

In this respect, for those who would be interested in this point, there is a good article by
Marie-Claire Galpérine on time in Damascius1 where she insists on this ‘being in the process
of self-distinction’ − the Greeks having the form to indicate this, they have a pronominal
form which is called the reflexive − which you can find in Les études philosophiques, an
obscure but scholarly review, Les études philosophiques2, July 1980, and which is one of the
rare recent texts published in France on Damascius. Oh! Oh...

So please grant me this internal distinction, however mysterious it may be. These degrees of
power are distinguished, yes, but they are distinguished from within. You see that this is way
to resolve things, and Plotinus will say the same thing as regards souls. Souls distinguish
themselves from the universal soul and from each other, yes, but through a very particular
kind of distinction, which is not an external distinction. They communicate from within, and
are perpetually caught up in the act of differentiating themselves, in a kind of process of selfdifferrentiation, the self-differentiation of the soul, the self-differentiation which marks
distinction, meaning internal distinction.

So, I would say that nûn consists in the act, in the power-act, the power-act by which a degree
of power, and in particular the soul – since it is in terms of the soul that everything is decided
– above all the soul, distinguishes itself. Distinguishes itself from what? Well, it distinguishes
itself from both the higher and lower degrees, and from the higher and lower powers. So, we
will say that the nûn is the power-act by which the soul distinguishes itself in a mode... under

                                                                                                   4

a mode of intrinsic distinction, under a pronominal mode… by which it distinguishes itself
from superior unities and inferior unities. You see that this does not involve time, it only
involves the series of… that are included in the aîon, ah... if you can understand this, that the
nûn is fundamentally the act of self-distinction oneself, the process of self-distinction, and it
is by this self-distinction that the nûn engenders time. Hence the thesis becomes extremely
simple, it becomes irrefutable. Time will be the measure of intensive quantity, the measure of
the intensive movement of the soul.

Well, but how? How, merely by way of the fact that it is a process of self-distinction, does
the nûn constitute time? I'm going to simplify my schema, which was not very successful last
time, so I'm going to focus only on a little part of the schema. So here... I give myself three
points: A, B, C. In fact, these are three powers. So, it's 1 to a power, 1 to another power, 1 to
a third power. It descends. Then there’s B. Let's say this is the soul. You remember the
schema. As I said, what does the nûn of the soul consist of? That is to say, in what does this
self-distinction of the soul consist? I don't ask what the soul’s distinction consists in? There is
no distinction of the soul, there is only a self-distinction of the soul. So, what does the selfdistinction of the soul consist in? It consists, as we have seen, in this, which will give us a
nice little drawing. I stop for a moment. [Pause]

And now I continue... The two are not symmetrical, let's see. Well, this is a very nice figure –
it’s not one they made, it’s just one I made for you, only for you – it will become very pretty
if I add a fourth term, D, as a still lower power. For if I add a fourth term, what does the nûn
of C consist in? The nûn of C consists in this… See how pretty it is, because they all nest
together. See, it's like a series of rings encircling each other... No… can’t you feel… the way
our souls blossom from there. It's, it's a mystical figure, you know? You have to live it. If you
live it, you will save your soul, but if you don't live it, it's the fall. Think about it.

So, well… that's what self-distinction is all about! And what does this consist in? Each nûn is
an act of self-distinction, it is the self-distinction of the corresponding power, it is the selfdistinction of the considered degree of power. And what does this self-distinction consist in?
On the one hand, it leans − everything is in the pronominal − it leans towards an outside, that
is to say, the outside, which is to say what lies below. It leans towards what lies below. It
leans… be careful, eh? That's why, unfortunately, a drawing can't really render this. It's a
vector. That's why I put in a little arrow. So, my soul leans towards what is below. In
Plotinus, it's... pros allo. It is the leaning towards something else. It pours itself out, it gives
of itself, and yet remains within itself. It is nûn, and it remains in its nûn. It leans, and it is…
it is enough for it to lean, that in a certain way from this very inclination, this bending
towards, it causes the lower degree to proceed. This, as we have already seen, is the the
procession, or the project.

But at the same time, it stays within itself, and it holds itself back. Yes, because if it fell into
the lower degree, you see... It holds back. It doesn't even have to hold back. By leaning pros
allo, by leaning towards the other, it stays within itself. Ahhh, so that, if it leans, and if
something proceeds from this leaning, it must also be said that it returns to itself at the same
time as it leans, at the same time as it makes something proceed from itself, a procession. At
the same time that it makes what proceed? You see, it’s the procession of the degrees of
power.... At the same time that it makes something proceed from itself, it returns to itself. It
returns to itself, but you will say to me: But this is not what this schema shows. Ha ha. Of
course not! But it does! Because by coming back to itself... returning to itself is necessarily to
return to that from which it itself proceeds, namely, the higher degree from which it proceeds.

                                                                                                 5

To return to oneself is to return within oneself to that from which one proceeds… and this is
the movement of conversion.

And the unity of this procession and conversion will be contemplation. Everything is
contemplation. We are all contemplation, since contemplation is the contemplation of what
comes after, below, meaning procession. The soul leans out. And this is the contemplation of
itself, the return to itself, the folding back upon itself, and it is the contemplation of what it
proceeds from, that is to say the return within itself to what it proceeds from. Everything is
contemplation.

So now we’re making headway. If the nûn is the power-act of self-distinction, you see in
what sense this must be... It is that each nûn is like the self-distinction of a procession and a
conversion, of an impetus and a return, an inclination and a reflection… an expectation and
recollection. In other words, each nûn, in the movement of self-distinction, necessarily
distinguishes something that functions as a pure future and something that functions as a pure
past. The nûn is the matrix of time. Ah...

And it is not the least of the Neoplatonist paradoxes that allows them to arrive at this notion.
It seems to them... Yet Plotinus does not analyze it. He is a kind of great philosopher-poet. He
is a philosopher-poet-teacher. It's rare to have all three together. I do not want to say that he
says it formally, but his texts completely insist upon this idea. It is very odd. For him it is
always syntheses that define souls. And you see that it is indeed the idea of selfdifferentiation, of the process of self-differentiation. The soul is defined by a synthetic act –
Third Ennead, Ennead Three: here we have the whole theme of the synthetic act of the soul.
And never will it be said, even by Kant, never will it be said so powerfully, as with this idea
of the synthetic act of mind and soul.

The nûn is really a synthesis. But it is the synthesis that divides. Indeed, the synthetic act is
the process of self-distinction, and this process of self-distinction performs the distinction
perpetually being made between a past and a future. What is a synthesis that divides? That's a
very odd idea. It has a name, after all it’s not… it's not impossible, it has a name. In logic and
in the theory of the syllogism, it's called disjunctive synthesis.

And the theory of syllogism − I'll have to cover this one year or another − the theory of
syllogism distinguishes − and this will be very important, even in Kant's case − three main
types of syllogisms: one of which is called "categorical", of the type "All men are mortal";
another is called "hypothetical", of the type "If it's day, there must be light"; and the third,
which is said to be "disjunctive", of the type "A living being is either immortal or mortal".
So, to simplify a lot we could say that…we could say that Aristotle is the great theorist of the
categorical syllogism. Simplifying less we could say that the whole theory of Aristotelian
substance is subordinated to the categorical syllogism, although Aristotle also theorizes other
syllogisms. But precisely speaking, it's not by chance that the fundamental category in
Aristotle's theory of substance is the one to which the categorical syllogism corresponds. The
Stoics were the ones who concocted a great theory of the hypothetical syllogism, thanks to a
theory of events that is very particular to them. And because the boxes of thought have
always been filled since the dawn of time, well, there remained the disjunctive syllogism, the
great theory of disjunctive syllogism elaborated by the Neoplatonists.

You will ask me about Plato… what did he contribute? Well, he was the first one. It was not
clear. For him the idea of synthesis was not yet free from the idea of analysis. Plato is

                                                                                                   6

undoubtedly the greatest theoretician of analysis. So here, it would be like… it becomes so
schematic that it's too beautiful − no, actually it's too bad − Plato, the great theorist of
analysis, Aristotle, the great theorist of the categorical synthesis; the Stoics with hypothetical
synthesis, ahh... The Neoplatonists, disjunctive synthesis. Now everything is clear, it’s all
wrapped up, okay. Well, it’s pretty pathetic! But okay…

You see in what sense I can say that the nûn is constitutive – in its synthetic power-act,
procession-conversion – that the nûn is constitutive of an originary time: the pure future of
procession, the leaning towards, and the pure past of conversion. In fact, where does the
privilege of the past that I mentioned last time derive from? My schema captures it very well.
The privilege of the past comes from this: nothing would work, nothing of the whole would
function if the conversion did not go beyond the procession, in the sense that it goes back not
to the term from which the procession began but always to the higher term. So, the real
matrix of time is conversion, you see? I mean, it's... Fine. That's the first point.

So, when I talk about "pure past" and "pure future", you have to understand what I mean. I
mean that this should not be confused with "that which contains an element that would be
past". I can say what is past; I can say what is future, what is to come, but on what condition
can I say what is past or what is to come? I can only say it if I have a form of the past and a
form of the future. This is what I was trying to explain last time. There are presents that are
passing − we don't know that yet, but I'm getting ahead of myself − there are former presents,
but you have to understand. It's amazing that I can grasp them as though they were the past. If
I didn't have a form of past, I wouldn't be able to grasp what is passing as past, or I wouldn't
be able to grasp what is past as past.

I must have a form of the idea of the past. What is not yet, I grasp as future, yes, I seize as
future what is not yet. But only on one condition, that I have a form of future into which I
pour what is not yet. But this form of pure past, this form of pure past, is what I was trying to
get at when I said last time that I grasp my former present as past, but I would never be able
to grasp my former present as past if I did not have at my disposal a past that had never been
present. It’s obvious. In other words, what is past can never account for the form of the past
in which I grasp it.

This is the synthesis of the nûn, as a disjunctive synthesis and as constitutive of an originary
time. The originary time is the time that never ceases to distinguish itself with each nûn,
following each nûn, as pure past and pure future. This is the originary time… a past that has
never been present, a future that will never be present. I need this in order to be able to grasp
the coming present as future, and the former present as past. So, now I can say: the nûn is the
constitution of an originary time. And if someone says to me that it was Kant who said that, I
would answer: Oh no, no, no, no. But Heidegger says that Kant said that, and I say: No, no.
But it is Heidegger who says that Kant said that, so it's not our fault. And with great respect,
we have to say: Well, no, it's not Kant who said this. Kant may have said it again, he may
have completely changed the meaning of what he was repeating... [Tape interrupted] [40:49]

Well, why do we need a second point? Why doesn't it end there? Ah... That's the good thing,
because I keep telling you, right? You, you can stop wherever you want, right? If you’ve had
enough, you can stop there, I tell you that's fine. That's enough. That's enough, I don't need
to... very well. I think it's quite legitimate. Just a little. You take a part. Ah... Preferably the
part you understand, but the perverse thing is that, in general, you tend to choose the part you
don't understand.

                                                                                                      7

Why doesn't it end there? Well, because there's this business that we're trying to hide. I don't
know if you sense this, that we’re trying to hide it because we are so afraid of it. It's a fear
that penetrates us, an abominable fear, and this fear, we hardly dare name it. It's that right
from the beginning, what has worried us is this business of zero. There is a zero, at the very
bottom, there. Perhaps, at the limit, perhaps this zero is a limit? But it's there. There is a zero
at the very bottom of the series. And that's why, like it or not, we are always led to stall
before facing that zero. What is it doing there, and what will happen because of it?

That's my second point, it's the return of the zero. We allowed ourselves that, okay, we
allowed it to ourselves, but what are we going to do with it, or rather what is it going to do to
us, once we have allowed it to ourselves? So, you're going to say to me, ah but why did you
allow it to yourself? We couldn't do otherwise. We didn't allow it to ourselves. Nothing
would hold if we didn't allow it to ourselves. And why would nothing hold if we didn't allow
it to ourselves? But because it was as important as… as at the other end of the series, what we
called 1 to the power of N, that is, the 1 beyond the One. The 1 deeper than the One, the
bottomless, groundless depth, the source of light. [Sound of someone arriving] You are late...
[Laughter] Ah... [Noise of the door]

We had to allow ourselves this. Why? Do you remember what intensive movement or
intensive quantity is? It is a multiplicity grasped as One. That suits us. It's a multiplicity
grasped as One, as opposed to extensive quantity where multiplicity is grasped as everything,
and not as One. That is to say, it is a multiplicity grasped as a degree of power, as One under
a given power. Now, this multiplicity which cannot be grasped as One, cannot be grasped as
One because of its indecomposable distance from zero, its indecomposable distance from
zero. So, we cannot escape the zero. This is the whole intensive quantity, and the whole
intensive movement that occurs between one and zero, as opposed to extensive quantity,
which would be one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, small n. The intensive quantity requires
a binarity of the type one-zero, given that the One will pass through all the powers. But each
time, the multiplicity of the intensive quantity understood as One – but understood as One in
terms of what? In terms of the nûn – each time, this multiplicity can only be evaluated by the
distance of its degree of power from zero.

So, zero is something I couldn’t avoid. And consumed by the idea that I couldn't avoid it,
once again, we’ve bought ourselves time. We haven’t lost sight of it, but we’ve gained time
before facing this zero… but what does this zero mean? And I said last time, understand that,
the more we go down the series of powers, the more the virtual multiplicity contained in each
degree of power, or in each unity… the more this virtual multiplicity tends to become actual.
That is to say, the more the process of self-distinction – that is to say, the internal distinction
– the more this internal distinction tends to appear as an external distinction, one that is
wholly made and no longer in the process of being made − an extrinsic distinction according
to which the terms become external to one another − the more I descend the scale, the more
the internal distinctions give way to distinctions which tend to be external. I'm translating
here, I can translate because we've been working on this for a long time: the more the figures
of light give way − imagine, it's very gradual, it’s even rather like a dream − the more the
figures of light give way to rigid figures. The rigid figure is the regime of extrinsic
distinction. There is the blackboard, there the wall, there the chair. These are extrinsic
distinctions where I count: one, two, three, four, five.

Could I do this for souls? No, oh no, oh no! The souls were caught up in the movement of
self-distinction. I couldn't say one, two, three, four. Fine, but the more I tend towards my

                                                                                                   8

zero, the more rigid geometrical figures will replace figures of light. The more rigid the
figures, the more limits will be formed, that is to say, it is the whole internal distinction that
now vacillates in favor of another regime of distinction. It is, if you like, the reign… what
takes shape, and what I see through the figures of light, what I see through a figure of light,
are these rigid forms. So, I might as well say: the more the ideal fall tends to become a real
fall. And that's what the zero meant. The zero meant − the zero was an abominable snigger −
it meant, you think you're falling ideally like sunlight, but you don't know that you're already
trapped in a real fall.

Indeed, what was the ideal fall? The ideal fall was the indecomposable distance from one
degree of power to zero. Light falls. Light falls but it doesn't mean that I have to pick it up
from the ground. It means that it stays up. The fall of light is the prototype of the ideal fall. It
was the procession-conversion. There was no real fall at all, since at the same time as the
procession was occurring, conversion prevented it from becoming a real fall… and gathered
it up at the same time as it was taking place. The conversion did not come after the
procession. It has to be simultaneous. So, well, the closer we get to zero, well, the more all
this is threatened. What emerges, through the figures of light, are the rigid figures I bump into
and which cause me pain. It is the order of bodies, it is the real fall of my soul in a body.
That’s what it is.

But you will say to me, if you’ve been following me, you will say: well, let's accept even
that. But why this reign? At most, what we can see is that the reign of extrinsic distinctions or
of rigid geometric figures… at most we see that this is the reign of matter and space. Space
will be the form of exteriority. The form of external distinctions. It is in terms of space that I
can say that the table is not the chair. Space is the receptacle of bodies, partes extra partes, in
the exteriority of their parts.

So, I can say, okay, this is all fine, matter as it fills space, as it expands or not even expands,
because it doesn't expand. It is the soul which expands by proceeding. I would say of matter
that it extends in space. To say it again in Latin, where the distinction is quite clear, it's not
extensio − extensio would be procession, the soul that assumes an extensio in its leaning − it's
rather extensum, that is to say the extended, in the past participle. So, let’s leave that aside for
a moment... But in what way is it zero? They go quickly at this point, don’t they? They go
quickly because I think that all the Greeks already understood it, but we have to pretend that
we are not Greeks, so... Why do they call this "zero" when it's still something? They might be
a bad thing, these rigid figures, but in the end, they are something. This matter is something.
How can it be assimilated to degree zero?

Well yes, listen well: it is enough to make a small conversion. When they say something is
degree zero, it's zero, it's non-being, what do they mean by this? In my view this is not well
expressed, it’s not well explained in the manuals. They say that matter for the Greeks is
equivalent to non-being. But it's not that at all. Matter is something, it is clearly something.
Rigid bodies are clearly something. Rigid bodies constitute something from the point of view
of matter and space. If they can be said to be zero, it is therefore from a completely different
point of view. But from what point of view? Our answer would be: from the point of view of
time. Unless you temporalize them, you cannot see why matter and rigid bodies equate to
zero. Why would extrinsic distinction be zero? You have to place it in time.
What does this mean? It means that the temporality proper to matter and to rigid bodies is the
present that passes, the present that passes. There is the table. I look away, there is the wall,
the table, the wall. I know that outside… though I would need time to go there… is a small

                                                                                                  9

garden. It is delightful, and then you have the dangerous boulevard, and so on. But here, we
are sheltered by the rigid figure of this classroom. And if I go out… Ah well, okay, the
present passes. What does this mean, the present that passes? What passes from this point of
view, what is no longer, is zero, what is not yet from the point of view of time. What is no
longer is zero. What is not yet is zero. What is, is zero. Why is that? Because it is the limit
between a "not yet" and a "no longer". This is what St. Augustine will say in wonderful
terms.
But these two times, the past and the future, you shouldn’t confuse them with the pure past
and the pure future as we have just seen. They mean what is past and what is to come. But
these two times, what is past and what is to come, how do they come about, since what is past
is no longer, and what is to come is not yet? The present itself, if it were always present
without being lost in the past, would no longer be time, it would be eternity. So if, in order to
be time, the present must lose itself in the past, how can we affirm that it "is", it too, since the
only reason for its being is to be no more? In fact, if we have the right to say that time "is", it
is because it is moving towards non-being... [Tape interrupted] [59:50]

Part 2

… Well, whatever, fine. But what is this present that is passing? The limit of a "not yet" and a
"no longer", what would this be? As he just said, it moves towards non-being. It is a
vanishing. It is a vanishing. It is a limit of time, a limit between "what is past" and "what is to
come". It is a limit as close to zero as one can imagine. You will say to me, well, we should
not introduce differentials. Why shouldn't we introduce differentials in the case of the
Greeks? Is it because they ignore differentials, these so-called vanishing quantities? No, they
don't ignore them, it's just that what they do doesn't resemble so-called infinitesimal calculus.
It resembles something that clearly exists for them and that in terms of our geometries we
would call the "method of exhaustion", which includes a whole theory of limits and of the
approach of a limit. So, I could say that it is indeed a pure vanishing.

But I mean, what is this pure vanishing present, the pure limit between what is not yet and
what is no longer, so in this sense, pure non-being? It too is an instant. It is an
instant. It is an instant, only this instant is not the nûn. This instant is not a nûn, obviously.
The nûn was the privileged instant and there I tried to comment on what "privileged" meant. I
would say: it is the instant that is the present which passes. So, what is this pure vanishing? It
is the any-instant-whatever. It is the any-instant-whatever. That which is zero is any-instantwhatever.

So now I have two instants. How come? Where did this instant come from, this business of
zero? We have seen that we cannot escape it. The simple but global answer would be: okay,
the nûn performs a synthesis. And within the synthesis that it performs, it distinguishes a pure
past and a pure future, through which it founds an originary time. But at the same time, it
must be reflected in an instant of a completely different nature. And this is the bad reflection.
This instant of a completely different nature is the any-instant-whatever, the passing present,
non-being or a pure vanishing.

And you understand why it must be reflected before? Because it is upon this present that
passes that the synthesis will be exerted. The synthesis of the nûn as a privileged instant will
be exerted on the instant that passes as an any-instant-whatever. Or at least if it happened
this way, we would be saved, and if we are saved, it is because it happens in this way. This is

                                                                                                     10

the only way to conjure up the zero; the zero is real. It’s the only way to conjure up the zero,
which is to say the rush towards nothingness of the any-instant-whatever. The zero is exactly
this: the rush towards nothingness of the any-instant-whatever. The rush to zero, the rush to
zero, the rush to nothingness of the any-instant-whatever, is what we will call the derived
time, the passing present, the pure vanishing. Well, there are two cases. Let's look at the first
one, which is the hardest: the synthesis of the nûn is exerted on the passing present. I am
saved, saved, saved. It's not easy, is it? You can’t just lead any kind of life to achieve that, it
doesn’t happen in your head. It's achieved through an exemplary life, a truly Neoplatonic life
which is the life of contemplation.

So then, why am I saved? I'm saved because, if you think about it… Oh no! Oh, is that noise
from next door? Well, we have to do worse! Yes, it really bothers me… It's like… Why are
we saved? I don't know anymore. I mean, it goes without saying. We are saved because the
instant that passes, if it succeeds in being submitted to the synthesis of the nûn, at that
moment, the former presents, the present instants that are now past are no longer nothing,
they are no longer "no longer anything". They fill the pure past for a certain length of time.
Namely, they fill the pure past in as much as I have recollections, and the moments to come
fill the pure future in as much as I have expectations. So, the passing present receives a
measure − that is, the originary time receives a measure − of the derived time... No, shit!
Rhaaa [Deleuze growling] I mean, the derived time receives a measure of the originary time,
so that I can say two things: the originary time is at the same time the number of the intensive
movement and the measure of the derived time. And I could speak, at that moment, of a more
or less derived time, a derived time that would be more or less long, depending on whether I
will be able, through the nûn, to encompass more or less of the former present − of the
present that has passed − and to anticipate more or less of the future − of the present that is
not yet here. So, I will be saved. I will have submitted the derived present to the order of
originary time.

Or else, and then, or else… or else, it is the real fall: the nûn is released. It remains with its
pure past and future, but its pure past and future remain empty. It falls into its double. It is
reflected in the any-instant-whatever, in the pure vanishing. And in this pure vanishing
reflects, undoes itself. And so I run from object to object, forgetting the preceding object,
unable to foresee the next. I run, I run, but like the passing present, I run to the grave, I run
towards non-being. Lost.

Triumph of derived time. The derived time has shaken its model. It has freed itself from the
yoke of the nûn. It has freed itself… but at what price? To drag us to death. We run, we
become agitated. We become agitated in the vanishing. We keep on vanishing from object to
object. And some will call it the dissipation of the soul3, others will call it the distension of
the soul4, others will call it the diversion of the soul5. They will describe it very differently,
but it will always be under the sign of one and the same fear, the fear linked to time of which
Paul Claudel spoke.6 And the fear linked to time of which Claudel spoke, is the revelation of
the creature’s nothingness. And this fear will increase as we pass from Neoplatonism to
Christianity and will take on enormous proportions. And the fear of time is very precisely the
anxiety that derived time will withdraw from the order of originary time Or, if you prefer, the
fear and panic that the any-instant-whatever may destitute the privileged instant, destitute the
nûn.

I am sure that you have understood from the depths of your soul. Anyway, if you haven't
understood from the depths of your soul, there's point in me repeating it because it can only

                                                                                                   11

be understood from the depths of your soul. Okay. And if you haven't understood from the
depths of your soul, it's because you’re more taken by other philosophies, so it doesn't matter
to you or to me anyway.

But one last confirmation and I'll be done. I make a third point only to… It would be good
then − if what I'm saying is somewhat true − to find a word in the terminology that
distinguishes itself from nûn. If nûn is the privileged moment, how can we speak about the
Greeks’ any-instant-whatever? It's funny; they have a word. They have a word − but again,
that doesn’t mean we can translate it as "any-instant-whatever", because that would be only
one of its meanings. And it's a very beautiful word, very difficult to pronounce. So, I'm
telling you this because you'll have to practice it. And then to translate it – because like nûn it
has all sorts of meanings – you can always translate it as "now" but... Ah! And what’s more
it’s such a long word... This is the word of loss; the word of salvation is nûn, and the word of
loss is – with a grave here – exaiphnès, exaiphnès [ἐξαίφνης]. And what does exaiphnès
mean, according to the Greek dictionary? It means suddenly, the sudden. It's both an adverb
and a noun, it means sudden, suddenly.

But then Plato… Plato wrote a sublime text that he called Parmenides.7 And Parmenides is a
text that will be seminal for the Neoplatonists, a text of reference, to the point that the great
texts of the disciples of... the greatest texts – the ones that were preserved, in any case – of
the disciples of Plotinus, Plotinus’s own disciples, are titled and presented as commentaries
on Parmenides. We still have two magnificent commentaries on Parmenides, which modern
commentators have generally done no more than reiterate − which doesn’t take that much
effort, but they haven't always admitted it − it's a commentary on Parmenides made by
Proclus and another commentary on Parmenides made by Damascius under the title
Problems and Solutions Concerning First Principles.8

Now, Parmenides, if you come to read it one day, or even if you just take a look at how it’s
constructed, you'll see that it's a pretty crazy book, since it develops a whole set of paradoxes
− it is the great development of Platonic paradoxes − and he employs a very strange method.
It concerns the One. What is the One? He proceeds by way of hypotheses.

First hypothesis − I'm not going to mention all of them because there are many, too many to
recount… so I'll tell you only the first three because these are the ones that interest me in
order to wrap up this point. If the One is not, in the sense of being "superior to being", if the
One is more than being, what must we conclude from this? You see immediately, if the One
is superior to being, the first thing we must conclude is that it is not. But then what does it
mean that the One is not? It corresponds − you imagine how happy the Neoplatonists were at
this! − it corresponds to One to the power of N. All sorts of delightful paradoxes will arise
from this.

Second hypothesis: If the One is, what is the result? You can see it immediately: If the One
is, the first consequence is that it is two, and this is annoying for the One. If the One is, it is
necessarily two since when I say, "The One is one" and when I say, "The One is", I say two
things. And it is not in the same way that it is one and that it is. So, if I say "the One is", I say
that it is two. If it is two, I'm still not out of the woods because it's going to leap out, well. In
any case, it's going to be bad, it's bad news. [Laughter]

Third hypothesis: If the One is less than being, if the One is inferior to being, then what
happens is even worse. And then, there are four other hypotheses, that is to say, in all, there

                                                                                               12

are seven hypotheses. We’ll remain with the first three. I would say that the second one
launches − and I think this is the launching of a notion in philosophy, that it's here that it
becomes a philosophical concept – it launches the idea of nûn… nûn being precisely the
synthesis. You see why it is the second hypothesis, the synthesis of being and the One which
in itself generates time. So, I believe − except that we should examine whether the nûn had
already appeared in the Presocratics, but I'd be surprised… I'd swear it doesn't, in any case, it
might have appeared as a word, in the sense of an ordinary word − but it's Plato who makes
nûn into a philosophical concept. Fine.

But the third hypothesis gives us... and this is probably also Plato’s doing, because I don't
think it's Heraclitus. I mean, what is there in Heraclitus? We no longer know since almost
nothing has survived, but still we sense a little… there are ways we can navigate through this,
you understand, because when Plato borrows a notion from his predecessors – it's not that the
Greeks had no sense of citation, though they don't explicitly cite – but he assumes a certain
tone which is not the same as when he forges a notion himself. He assumes a certain tone,
which is always a critical tone, which is like winking to the reader to guide them by referring
to an already well-known theory.

In the third hypothesis, he launches the concept of exaiphnès, which is not at all like nûn, and
which is explicitly defined as a vanishing, as a vanishing, and as any-instant-whatever in its
becoming. You see how different this is, it's not the synthetic axis that will constitute time.
It's the instant in its becoming. So, I'm not going to develop this at all, since it would take us
far from our current research. I am not saying that these two notions in Plato coincide with
what we have drawn from them. Please don't mix them up. I will just say that Plato already
proposes a distinction between the two notions, and that this distinction, although very
different from the one we claim to discover in the texts of the Neoplatonists, this distinction
will be very interesting for the future of Neoplatonism.

So, I’ve answered the question: in what way does the regime of geometric distinctions equate
to zero? And in precisely what way do we risk our salvation? And here I would like to −
because they are pervaded by these things, not necessarily by Neoplatonism, but by a certain
conception that is very… well, it’s closer to the order of procession-conversion – I would like
to end by reading, precisely… My point is always to try to make you understand that it is
completely normal to treat the world of rigid distinctions as a kind of nothingness or as a kind
of introduction to nothingness, provided we interpret it no longer in terms of space but in
terms of time. See, that was my whole point: the world of rigid figures, if you don't interpret
it… if you don't keep it within strictly spatial terms and if you introduce time, if you interpret
it in terms of time, it will lead you directly to pure nothingness.

And here I take a Russian novelist named Saltykov9 from the late 19th century, S-a-l-t-y-k-ov. And I’ll just read you something about the state of an alcoholic, as only Russians know
how to describe it... no, yes… that would be a good subject for a thesis, I say, if any of you
want to do a thesis on this, the difference between the Russian alcoholic and the American
alcoholic in the two literatures, they, they’re the not at all the same at all, you know, not the
same at all, given that they both drink a lot, right? They’re not like the French. I'm not even
talking about the Japanese with their sake, because that's a disaster. So then, you could do a
thesis, comparative world literature, the alcoholic in comparative world literature. But in any
case, the Russian alcoholic would have a special place.

                                                                                                13

So here we have the poor alcoholic Saltykov, and what does he say?10 Listen carefully: “His
feeble imagination tried to create images” – he was nostalgic for the nûn, he wanted to lean
towards the outside – “his blunted memory attempted to pierce the mists of the past” – he
tried to repeat the conversion, to bring the nûn back to himself – “but the images were broken
and meaningless, and the past remained dim and formless. There was no recollection, either
bitter or sweet, as though an impervious wall” – rigid figure – “as though an impervious wall
separated the past from the present. Stepan” – the character is called Stepan – “was
completely filled by the present, which seemed like a prison cell” – it is not the present of the
privileged moment, it is not the present of the nûn – “in which he would be locked up for
eternity without consciousness of time or space. His mind took in nothing but the room, the
stove, the three windows in the front wall” – again, rigid bodies – “the room, the stove, the
three windows in the front wall, the squeaking wooden bed with its mattress worn thin, and
the table with the bottle…” − so he is in the element of the rigid figure. What could be more
geometric than all these figures? − “As the contents of the bottle decreased and his head grew
hotter and hotter, even this boresome sense of the present gradually faded…” [Tape
interrupted] [1:26:50]

... geometric form dissolves, but it is only to the benefit of the figures of light. They fall into
the blackness, they fall into the zero. "Finally, the darkness itself vanished and its place was
taken by a phosphorescent sheen” – this is nothingness – “It was an endless void” – well, he
says it, so much the better, he really says it, yes, he says it. You see? – “It was an endless
void with not a color or a sound, but radiant with sinister splendor…” – one might as well
say, with no recollection, no expectation – "Before his eyes the stove…" − Ah, here we have
a return to a rigid figure − "Before his eyes the stove. His thought was so filled with this
image..." − and of course he clings to it… the any-object-whatever, he clings to the anyobject-whatever, and the any-object-whatever is the object that presents itself at the anyinstant-whatever – “Objects of immediate perception filled his mind so completely that it was
closed to other impressions…” Then the window took the place...You see, here we have the
succession of presents passing: after the stove, the window… Then the window took the
place of the stove, the window, the window, the window! He needed nothing. − I don't need
anything, I don't need anything... – “He filled his pipe and lighted it. It dropped from his
nerveless fingers. His tongue mumbled something, but seemingly by force of habit only. He
sat in silence and stared at one point. He felt an intense craving to start drinking again, to
raise the temperature of his body… to grasp a nûn, but alas, all the nûn were...” – The end of
the sentence is something I’ve added ... Forgive me, I couldn't help myself. But, on the other
hand, everything else is actually in the text and shows this passage from the geometric object
to nothingness, from the point of view of time. Fine.

So, do you understand all this? We've almost, we've finished a large part. And I would like to
continue, just before we take a little rest, I would like to continue because I know – I’m not
being vain when I say this − I know the Neoplatonists quite well but I know Saint Augustine
very, very badly.

Now there’s Éric, who works a lot on this and who knows Saint Augustine very well. So, my
question to Éric is: Éric, just as you did a marvelous study regarding the history of Aristotle's
great crisis – regarding the time of chrematistics as opposed to the time of the economy – I
would like you to follow up… In your view does Saint Augustine fit into this schema to some
extent? Is it, in your opinion, a quite different case? Or could we at least agree on a middle
position, that he renews the scheme in the direction of Christianity, but that he keeps
something essential? This is what I would like you to tell us.

                                                                                                14

Éric Alliez: Yes, I have devoted myself, to be brief…I can make a kind of comparative
outline of a certain number of the major positions shared between Plotinus and Augustine
[inaudible words] a certain number of… [inaudible words] that you have made.11

Deleuze: You were stupid to stop the recorder, right? [Deleuze addresses someone near him,
but not Hidenobu Suzuki, to whom we owe all the recordings we use here, because he
continues with the recording despite the very low sound] You stop your recorders because it's
not me talking but maybe it's because they can’t pick him up... if you can speak as loud as
you can, huh?

Éric: Yes, and I want to show… because in fact it's very interesting how [Inaudible remarks]
in my reading of Saint Augustine and Plotinus' Ennead [Inaudible remarks] I have the
impression that...

Deleuze: I see someone smoking, am I right?

Éric: I'll put it out right away. [Laughter]

Deleuze: The person speaking has the right to smoke. But no one else! We're going to stop
soon so you'll be able to go and smoke outside, in two minutes, in... [Alliez suggests pausing
right now] No, no, no! because we will lose the focus... There's... There's just...

Éric: I have the impression that… [inaudible words] is absolutely heterogeneous, and at the
same time, that a certain number of propositions can more or be superposed from Plotinus
onto Augustine. So, I think that one of the great commonplaces in the history of
philosophy… is indeed the supposed Neoplatonism of Augustine. What I would also like to
show is that through a shift that seems to me to be completely irresistible, that is to say, the
schema gives me, on the one hand, and on the other hand, the same… [inaudible words] I
believe that in the end Augustine is irreducible to the Neoplatonists, and indeed Augustine
announces something completely different in terms of a new subjectivation of time.

So, in terms of this kind of very, very schematic outline, well, I'll start with a quotation from
Plotinus, and I think it's a kind of treatise that has been spoken about at length in the third
Ennead [inaudible words], and Plotinus writes that it suffices to say that movement could
cease to occur only at certain intervals in time. Now this is precisely where Augustine begins
from in book 11 of the Confessions in his critique of Aristotle, and he will obviously develop
this hypothesis, referring to cultural tradition. But this reversal is important in relation to
Aristotle, since in Plotinus as in Augustine we come to measure the movement of a body by
means of time. This is practically stated in book 11 of the Confessions, the references to
which I will give later. Okay.

So, that would be the first point, still being very schematic, and this quotation that I think you
already gave [inaudible words] from Plotinus12, where we find: "But an all too meddling
nature, that wanted to be in charge of itself, to belong to itself, and chose to seek for more
than its present state, put itself in motion, and time put itself, too, in motion” – time too, that
is, "time reposing in being", which we find in an obviously completely Christianized form in
Augustine with the famous thesis of [Inaudible remarks]… thus time reposing in being set
itself in motion and moved towards an ever renewing future. So, the first thing that we might
notice is that in Augustine too we have an approach to time that is defined firstly by the

                                                                                                 15

future in terms of the quest for love. He too is cynical as Plotinus is in a phrase that I believe,
comes from the sixth Ennead, concerning what is missing, and so we find my first remark in
the third Ennead. On the other hand, Augustine is no longer on the side of this ideal fall…
[inaudible words] on the side of the real fall. For Augustine, on the contrary, here again, it's
not exactly a quotation I’m going to give you, but it's practically word for word: Once Adam
set love of self against love of God, human beings lost their stability in temporal duration".
Stability in time, well, that's… [inaudible word] Well, that brings us to my second point.

Deleuze: If you allow me to interrupt you very quickly, because this is a point where you are
fundamentally right. For Christianity, there is no longer an ideal fall. The ideal fall is a very,
very Christian concept, I mean very anti-Christian, which Christianity cannot support because
it negates the creation. It is the negation of the creation, so if there is a point where, indeed,
Neoplatonism will have no possible equivalent, it is in this admirable idea of the ideal fall.
There, I am completely in agreement.

Éric: [Inaudible remarks, probably on the distinction that Deleuze has just mentioned] What
is also important in this citation I have just given you... [Inaudible remarks] is that I believe it
offers a spiritualization of movement… [Inaudible remarks with the sound of an airplane]
So, in this ideal, the life of the soul in its distension occupies time. To say that time and the
life of the soul confronting each other in the movement in which the soul passes from one
[inaudible words] doesn’t permit us to say something, and we understand why… [inaudible
words]

Deleuze: That's the synthesis, right? It's the synthesis, it's the synthetic affinity.

Éric: And if, considering that the anterior and posterior are in life and in the movement of the
sky, one says that this is time because time is something to do with movement. If one refuses
also to see in it something of a movement that is more real, which itself contains elements of
the anterior and posterior… we commit a great absurdity by granting to an inanimate
movement – meaning the anterior and posterior – the movement of the world, and
consequently, time. Especially if we deny to this movement the image proper to the inanimate
movement from which anterior and posterior derive, because the movement is spontaneous.
It produces each of its own acts one after the other, generating a passage from one to the
other…

Deleuze: You mean to say it’s the movement of the soul that comes first because it is what
constitutes the posterior and anterior...

Éric: There is a deterritorialization of movement, and again, I don’t think… I think it's a
rather different shift… Anyway, I don't think you find the same movement in Augustine. I
think it's quite a different problem to… [inaudible words] Yes, the third point, well, I
apologize because I'm giving these points a little… [inaudible word]

Deleuze: No, it's good, it's good, it's good. It’s good to have a bit of disorder.

Éric: The third point is... I think that the Neoplatonic origin is unquestionable… a definition
of eternity as substance and no longer as attribute. I think that here Augustine's references to
Neoplatonism are clearly explicit, whereas, in general, he tends to blur the Neoplatonic origin
of concepts.

                                                                                                 16

The fourth point is obviously – and here I must be completely impartial – the relationship
between distentio and the famous Neoplatonic... I think that… [inaudible name] in his
commentary on book 11 of the Confessions [inaudible words] makes a very big mistake in
attributing to Augustinism the fact of referring distentio in the end to the triple presence. I
think that here, the Neoplatonic and Augustinian origin is questionable, and that, I think
[inaudible words]. So, there, effectively... then, regarding this, the same shift between ideal
fall and real fall, insofar as the distentio, is also, and perhaps first of all… [inaudible words]
The real fall, that is to say that...

Deleuze: Absolutely!

Éric: Obviously, the distentio makes the fall the permission...

Deleuze: Because, do you agree that the ideal fall would be called extensio?

Éric: Absolutely.

Deleuze: There is an extensio of the soul, and this is the ideal fall. Whereas the real fall is the
distentio.

Éric: It is very interesting… [inaudible words] to consider this ambiguity for Christianity, to
imagine the ideal fall contains this very, very important distinction… [inaudible words]
between what he calls expectatio futurum and extensio ad superiora. Schematically speaking,
the distentio is the quest [inaudible words] for the future.

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes…

Éric: The perpetual movement… the desperate attempt [inaudible words]. Now at the end of
Book 11, referring to a certain number of passages [inaudible words], Augustine thus marks
this distinction between expectatio futurum, that is to say the movement of perpetual quest
towards the future, which is determined, moreover, by self-love, and on the other hand,
extensio ad superiora, that is to say, a movement of a pure horizontal and vertical nature
which, in a certain way, is inspired by the movement of Neoplatonic conversion, and indeed,
the term there is extensio. So, of course, I don't want to say that this is the ideal fall and the
real fall, but I think that if we want to try to find a comparable movement...

Deleuze: A remnant, a residue of this notion, yeah, yeah...
Éric: ... The distinction… I mean, the idea of… that you mentioned seems interesting to me…
[inaudible words] So there you have an outline that's really quite pathetic because it's
completely mangled.

Deleuze: No, there are four points of comparison, yes, four points, all at once, yes.

Éric: On the other hand, there is a gap that seems to me to be quite [inaudible words], which
is effectively a gap between the ideal fall and the real fall. One would be tempted to draw a
parallel between, on one hand, the time of the soul… in the third Ennead… and on the other a
relative time that he discusses in the sixth Ennead. So, in this passage in the sixth Ennead,
Plotinus writes what is for me one of the most [inaudible word] texts. And this is where
Plotinus appears to say something which is very complicated because in the Ennead…

                                                                                                 17

[inaudible words]. So [inaudible words] space and time are on the same plane if we consider
beings in their manifestations as… [inaudible words]

So, it is possible that place and time are types of relation, place because it is the container of
the body, and time because it is the measure of movement, that is to say, the interval between
its beginning and its end. So here, indeed, we have the impression that the movement of this
relative time, is in a certain way, a derived time. Here we go back to a problematic which is,
nevertheless... But obviously, if we go back to the origin of beings, [inaudible words] we
realize that this is not yet spatial, but it is already temporal. But obviously, it is not the same
time because in the soul, as Plotinus says especially in the fourth Ennead, the anterior and
posterior exist in another way than they do in temporal things. And of course, this time of the
soul which is the true time, therefore not relative time, but an image… [ inaudible word]

Well, on the one hand, in Plotinus, there is this movement between a time of the soul and this
relative time, this time of the sensible, let's say, of phenomena, phenomenal time. Now, in
Augustine, we could say that more or less the same thing occurs, since, finally, there is a
rather surprising parallel between Book 11 of the Confessions and Book 11 of The City of
God.13 Regarding Book 11 of the Confessions, therefore in the Confessions, I developed very
briefly, four examples, the time [inaudible words] of the soul, time therefore as distentio in
the triple present. Augustine says there is no past, there is no future, there is only a past
present, and a present… [ inaudible words].

On the other hand, in book 11, chapter 11 of The City of God… book 11, chapter 4, we have:
“For if eternity and time are rightly distinguished by this, that time does not exist without
some movement and transition, while in eternity there is no change, who does not see that
there could have been no time had not some creature been made, which by some motion
could give birth to change—the various parts of which motion and change, as they cannot be
simultaneous, succeed one another—and thus, in these shorter or longer intervals of duration,
time would begin? Since then, God, in whose eternity is no change at all, is the Creator and
Ordainer of time, I do not see how He can be said to have created the world after spaces of
time had elapsed, unless it be said that prior to the world there was some creature by whose
movement time could pass.”14

So here too, in a very, very different way, we see a return [inaudible words], that is to say this
kind of presence [inaudible words] is what seems to me completely different. This time is far
from being a derived time – as in the case of Plotinus in the sixth Ennead – and to a certain
extent [inaudible words] it is what Augustine calls creaturely time, time as a creature. So
there is a very odd tension [inaudible words] between, on the one hand, a creaturely time and,
on the other hand, this time defined by the distentio of the soul, here distentio [inaudible
words]. So I think that the relationship to Aristotle is quite different. Well, I think this is
completely in line with what you showed [inaudible words], that is to say that in any case –
and here I speak in both cases– it's again a question of time as an image [inaudible word],
that time passes in a way [inaudible word]. I believe that there is a shift [inaudible words]
between Augustine and Plotinus. Well, on that note, I note the parallel between two Books
11: Book 11 of the City of God and Book 11 of the Confessions and I...

Deleuze: You tell me when I can intervene.

Éric: Of course.

                                                                                                18

Deleuze: No, no, I mean when you've finished a point so that I can... Only when you've
finished your point, I don't want to cut you off at all.

Éric: Well, I just wanted to say that ambivalence also appears both in The City of God and
within the Confessions. In both cases you have a double approach.

Deleuze: Here's my concern, Éric. Once again, you know Saint Augustine better than I do. I
have the feeling that there are all the shifts you want, that there is nonetheless a distinction
between originary time and derived time in Saint Augustine, and that there is not simply...
And that derived time is the present that passes. The originary time is the reflected present,
reflected in the form of the present of the present, the present of the past, the present of the
future, since this is what will allow us to say that one time is slower than another. Whereas
the present of the present… the present of the present, of the past, of the future, the tripled
present, is actually an originary synthesis, and the passing present is no more than a derived
time that will receive its measure from the originary time. So, the point where I would agree
with you in advance is that Augustine probably does not conceive the synthesis of originary
time in the same way as do Plotinus and the Neoplatonists. But there are these two aspects of
time: originary time and derived time. You would agree, I think...

Éric: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: Ah, well, okay... okay, okay... yes, yes, so it’s me who hasn’t quite understood
then... [Tape interrupted] [1:52:48]

Part 3

Deleuze: So, yes?

Éric: Simply… he raises the problem...

Deleuze: He is much more afraid than the others. I mean Christianity, for the reason you said,
because there is no more ideal fall, all falls are real, the fear of time, which is the sign, which
is the signature that we are no more than nothingness, as Claudel says, when he ends on the
fear of time, which means that we as creatures are no more than nothingness, that we are
nothingness in the bosom of God. So, they have a fear of time that the Greeks had no reason
to have. It is necessary to reverse the commonplace assumption. The commonplace
assumption would consist in saying that the Christians discovered time, while the Greeks
ignored time because they only believed in cycles etc. All this is nonsense! It's not that at all.
Moreover, it seems to me that the Greeks are much less afraid of time than the Christians. It’s
true that the Christians discover time, if you call discovering time discovering it in fear and
trembling; they are the ones who experience fear and trembling with regard to time. As for
the others, it is not that they ignore time, neither historical time, nor physical time, nor
cosmological time and so on. They’re perfectly aware of all that, but for them, it is a question
of situations, which are crises much more than fears! There are great crises where they will
all die, they know, the crisis of the city, crisis of history, crisis of everything! Would you
agree with that?

Éric: Yes, you're very much in line with what Kant… says about Augustine [Inaudible
remarks].

                                                                                                 19

Deleuze: Yeah, yeah!

Éric: ... to set out to conquer time only after having proved the transcendent position of the
soul in relation to time.

Deleuze: Yes, yes! but this transcendent position is an act of synthesis constitutive of an
originary time.

Éric: Exactly! To conclude, I'd like to point out what is a bit of an enigma, the anomaly that
Augustine expresses in relation to this schema, which is that in Plotinus, the dimensionality,
the vectorization of time, is very clearly marked by past, present and future. We can find a
certain number of examples of this in the Enneads. What seems to me important here,
following an argument Merleau-Ponty15 makes which seems to me very, very convincing –
and curiously, he also quotes Augustine at one point, who completely misses this movement
– In any case, his demonstration remains… and I believe that this movement, this movement
of dimensionality, of past, present, future, always refers back in a certain way to a circular
type of movement. So the image of circular time has been found in more than one…
[Inaudible remarks] It has been found many times since then, and it's more… [Inaudible
remarks] So, it's in the second Ennead and in the sixth Ennead, I think, that we find the finest
explorations of this. The universal soul circulates around God; it surrounds him with its love,
it slides as much as it can around him, not being able to direct itself towards him, so it moves
around him. And then time is like a line that seems to go on and on, although it depends on a
central point around which it turns. Wherever this line advances, it retains the image of this
point which itself does not move and around which it wraps itself in circular motion… On the
other hand, in Augustine, what is quite surprising is that the dimensionality of time is
completely reversed, that is to say that time comes from the future to go towards the past, and
you find this both in the Confessions and in The City of God.

Deleuze: That's important! A primacy of the future? Yes! Because indeed it is not the same
future. It's not the future of a procession, it's not the future of a "leaning towards the
outside"... Yeah, yeah!

Éric: Hence the importance of this...

Deleuze: Hence the importance of the theory of the future? That would be the real novelty of
Saint Augustine, to break with the theory of contingent futures of the Ancients, to make a
new theory of futures, which would fit − for those who remember then, at that time, in what
we did in the first quarter, when we encountered the problem of contingent futures − the
naval battle which will take place tomorrow or which will not take place tomorrow16... Fine.
As for me, in all of what you said, there is only one point where I can't follow you, where all
the fibers of my being protest. Only certain texts prove you right, it's a question of evaluating
these texts. You will find all the texts you want where you may be right to speak of a circular
time in Plotinus, but I believe that these are secondary texts which are homages to Plato, and
I don't believe in them at all. I don’t think there’s anything circular about it, because there
can't be a circular time of the soul, no. What there can be is metempsychosis. But this is a
very, very important point. The idea of the reincarnation of souls and that of the eternal
return, which is to say of circularity, are two absolutely different ideas that people tend to
confuse, as you do when you go too fast.

                                                                                               20

There is for the Neoplatonists an idea they cling to which is called palingenesis17, that we
could call circulation, metempsychosis, change of lives, of the soul etc. But what is very
striking that this is an idea which has completely different origins from the astronomical
eternal return, that is to say of the rotatory movement… it’s completely different.

But Éric is indeed right in saying that this poses a problem of interpretation, a very delicate
one, because in Plotinus you will find all the texts, all the circular metaphors you like. But in
my view, these are absolutely nothing but metaphors and tributes to Plato and to Plato's
circular movement. It's his way of recuperating Plato, saying: yes, yes, I'm a Platonist, but I
don't think that in his own thought he includes anything like a circular movement. And for a
simple reason, which is that the movement of powers cannot in any way be circular.
Conversion is not circulation. There is not… if you like, there is not and there cannot be at
the same time circularity and procession-conversion. It's too… circularity is a physical or
cosmological movement. I don't believe that a movement of the soul can be circular in nature.
And again, for a simple reason, which is that… even from the point of view of
metempsychosis, what is the problem? It is not to ensure the birth wheel − or simply the
wheel, as we say, though it is wrong to talk about a wheel − it is to get out of the birth wheel.
That is to say, that it is not circular. Palingenesis is fundamentally linked to the idea of an
exit, which is to say, it can’t be a circle because one does not come out of a circle; a circle is
by definition closed. The reason I insist on this is that both historically, mythically, and in
every sense, the two notions, the notion of rebirth of the soul and the notion of astronomical
eternal return are completely different and have completely different origins. However, this
doesn’t mean that you aren’t absolutely right about the terminology Plotinus uses. He pays
his homage to Plato, but unlike you I don't see it as anything other than a homage.

Éric: [Sound extremely low] No, I mean that this is something that also bothers me because
it's true that, in a way, I come back to this definition that at the beginning of my work I had
completely rejected, so it's really a common place, between Greek circular time and Christian
linear time...

Deleuze: Yes, you mustn't, you mustn't do that.

Éric: For the Greeks, there is clearly an overlap of a certain number of texts [Inaudible
remarks] involving conceptions of linear time and that conversely in Augustine we can find
what are almost cyclical conceptions, so it plays both ways...

Deleuze: What’s more, the Christians took over all the cyclical conceptions that you can
think of.

Éric: [Inaudible words] What made me reintroduce these texts of Plotinus a little bit is that, at
first, I had indeed taken them as metaphors, but it's this opposition that seems to me to have
occurred between past, present, future and the future

Deleuze: That's the very important point, a synthesis of originary time that would be
organized according to the future. So, I’m not surprised that you invoke Merleau-Ponty,
because Sartre and Merleau-Ponty were very keen on a synthesis of time that would be
determined by the future, that would be determined according to the future, because they
reproached Husserl and Heidegger for not having understood this question of the primacy of
the future. There would indeed be a French Augustinism… of the French existentialists which
would be very good, which would be, ... perfect, perfect, perfect.

                                                                                                21

Éric: [Inaudible words] the famous book by Husserl...

Deleuze: If Sartre had known that...

Éric: [Inaudible words] Lessons on the consciousness of time18 opens with a tribute to
Augustine.

Deleuze: Merleau-Ponty?

Éric: No, Husserl!

Deleuze: Ah, I don't remember, the Lessons on Time, you say?

Eric: Yes! It starts with a tribute to Augustine; I don't remember the exact phrase.

Deleuze: Ah yes, the Lessons on the Intimate Consciousness of Time, yes, yes, yes, yes... yes
but Husserl’s a "theologian so he knew… he knew Augustine very well, yes, he knew them
all. He's a father of the church, Husserl… Besides, all his disciples... Is that it? Are you done?

Éric: Yes, but I just wanted to add...

Deleuze: That's really good.

Éric: [Inaudible words] In conclusion, what is quite funny is this ambivalence, therefore, of
the compression of time in Augustine, it is these consequences in terms of the problem of
usury since, in fact, we can play certain texts of Augustine against Augustine himself,
because the great argument for justifying the [inaudible word] of God is that we cannot sell
time, time belongs only to God. Here, in fact, Augustine's texts on time, which is God's
creature, are explicitly deployed. But what is very curious is that in the 11th and 12th
centuries, certain "Augustinians" would take issue with this, by playing, on the contrary, on
the idea of time in the Confessions, that is to say, by setting Augustine against himself...

Deleuze: Oh yes! So... in what century was that?

Éric: [Lost words, covered by Deleuze's voice]

Deleuze: Saint Augustine, which century is it?...

Éric: Saint Augustine? Fifth...

Deleuze: Fifth! He comes before Damascius. That's funny. And the Augustinians you say,
when was that?

Éric: The Augustinians I’m talking about were from the 12th century.

Deleuze: Twelfth, yeah, yeah!
Éric: And the famous condemnation of… [inaudible words] in 1255 will try to put the brakes
on by saying, by forbidding…19

                                                                                                22

Deleuze: Eric, I love you when you pronounce this famous sentence… [Deleuze chortles]
followed by a completely unknown name! [General laughter, including Deleuze]

Eric: In fact, there are three books.

Deleuze: There are what?

Éric: There are three books by Pierre Duhem...20

Deleuze: You see how culture corrupts! [Laughter] Duhem wrote three books on this famous
condemnation. [Deleuze continues laughing]

Éric: [Inaudible, interspersed with laughter]

Deleuze: Well, well, well. Well, listen, that's perfect, because that gives us a complete
framework. So yes, I'm running late. We'll pause for five minutes and then we'll start again,
but don’t take long. I'll tell you what, yes... a little pause. What time is it, exactly? [Tape
interrupted] [2:06:46]

… Deleuze: Well, I think we're on vacation until the 27th... Ah, no! Sorry, until the 17th...
until the 17th, right?

Various students: Yes, that's right...

Deleuze: Until the 17th, until the 17th of April, the 17th of April is a Monday

A student: No, it's a Tuesday...

Deleuze: No, a Monday... So, we're on vacation until the morning of the 17th...

Student: Until Tuesday morning.

Deleuze: So that's until Monday the 16th? Are we on vacation until then or until the 17th?

Hidenobu Suzuki: No, no, no. We start again on the 16th.

Deleuze: Well, that's what I said.
Deleuze: So then, I'm running a bit late. I'll conclude: Here are exactly the conclusions we are
able to draw for the moment. I see three groups of conclusions… we have considered three
images that we can call indirect images of time, three kinds of indirect images of time.

First image of time: time as a measure of extensive motion, in Plato and Aristotle. Such a
time refers to the idea of privileged positions through which a moving body passes.

The second study we made: time as the second form of time as an indirect image. This time,
it is time as a number of the intensive movement of the soul, in Plotinus, the Neoplatonists
and briefly in Saint Augustine. This second conception implies the position on the intensive
movement of privileged instants, the nûn.

                                                                                                23

Third order of research, which at first glance had nothing to do with all of this, and not even
at a second glance: since cinema presented itself as the movement-image, the corresponding
image of time was obtained by montage, thus as an indirect image of time. This indirect
image of time had two aspects, as if by chance: time as deriving from the movement of the
world or extensive movement, movement in space, and this was the great cinema of
movement; on the other hand, time as deriving, also through montage, from a supposed
movement of the soul, and here we had the great cinema of light, even if light was conceived
in a very different way by German Expressionism and by the French school. But time as
arising from a movement of the soul with the problem of the fall, and so on. I'm not saying
that the soul… that Murnau is a Neoplatonist. I'm just saying that cinema on its own account
has managed to recreate problems that philosophy had traversed in its own way but hadn’t
managed to resolve.

Second set of results − that was our first set of research − second set: everywhere we noticed
... what, what made this position difficult, to conclude the time of movement, that is to say, to
draw from extensive or intensive movement, an image of time which could only be an
indirect image? What were the difficulties in this? Well, the difficulties lay in this: in all
domains... [Tape interrupted] [2:12:56]

... anomaly of extensive movement in all domains. Astronomical aberration, that is to say
aberration in the movement of the planets; physical anomaly as one approaches the earth:
Aristotle's sublunary world… political anomaly with the crisis of the Greek city; economic
anomaly shown in exemplary style by Aristotle, as forms develop that can already be called
forms of a pre-capitalism. In this first direction, what we have is a crisis of time as an indirect
image of movement, of extensive movement. It is fundamentally a crisis, the fundamental
concept here is that of crisis.

In the second direction, time as an indirect image of the intensive movement of the soul, here
too a formidable anomaly develops, namely the real fall and the derived time, that time which
runs to nothingness. Hence what we have this time is fear and not crisis, it will be the sign of
fear, fear of derived time gaining its independence, that is to say, ceasing to submit to the
demands of originary time.

In a whole other domain, that of cinema, the movement-image has never been separable from
anomalies of movement, anomalies that are intrinsically cinematographic. Of these
anomalies, false continuity would be an example though only one example among a thousand
others. When do anomalies in movement culminate in the cinema? We gave our response in
the first term: it is when a failure of the sensory-motor schema occurs, that is to say, when the
situation no longer naturally continues in action, in normal action, when there is a deliberate
failure, a questioning of the sensory-motor schema. At this point, it becomes very difficult, in
terms of all these anomalies of movement, to maintain time as a simple indirect image of
movement. Here time tends to become independent, to shake off its dependence on
movement.

Third result, third group of results: from here on, in the three fields under consideration we
are faced with a choice. Either to try to save the primacy of movement over time, the only
question being, at what cost? Or else, to not only accept, but to desire this liberation of time
from movement, which will mean: autonomy of derived time, collapse of the idea of an
originary time. There is only derived time, so that derived time is no longer derived time.

                                                                                                 24

We are embarking on an adventure where we will have to capture a direct image of time, a
direct time-itself or if you prefer time itself, a little bit of time in its pure state! It is
movement that will depend on time and no longer time that will result from movement, and
this was the second term of the alternative. In the first term of the alternative, we try to save
what can be saved and to maintain derived time according to the demands of the synthesis of
originary time, but at what price?

First possibility: maintaining a rural life, time, maintaining a rural life. The time of daily life,
derived time is the time of daily life, of every-day banality, this is what derived time is. Well,
it is necessary to maintain this time of daily life it in spite of everything, and to find
conditions where it will take on a rhythm, whatever aberrations there are, where it will take
on the rhythm of the cardinal points or the seasons. In the sublunary world one needs to place
oneself in the best conditions to receive the effects of the most perfect extensive movement.
And so it is to save a rural community, because it is the peasants who are close to... etc., who
are close to works and days. Works and Days is the title of a book by Hesiod21, whose theme
is conformity with nature. Conformity with nature means, maintaining derived time, under
the requirements of an originary time which itself refers to the great rhythms of nature, to the
great rhythms of the world and of nature. In terms of the Greek city, this represents the rural
reaction; it represents someone like Aristophanes, in his hatred of Socrates, in the hope of
saving the Greek city by constituting agricultural communities. It represents the whole
reaction against an imperialist and commercial Athens. From then on, it is an anti-democratic
movement but a very strange one; it is against Athenian democracy but also against Athenian
imperialism and the commercial politics of Athens. It tries to reconstitute the city on the basis
of agricultural communities. It's already in ruins, it's already in ruins by the time of Plato and
Aristotle, sorry, I meant Aristophanes, so let's not talk about it anymore.

Or else save the harmony of the soul. If one saves the harmony of the soul… You see how it's
no longer conformity, it's no longer in accord with nature, it's the harmony of the soul,
accordance with the world, these two profoundly Greek ideas, accordance with the world,
harmony of the soul. The harmony of the soul is much closer to the Neoplatonists. Plotinus
says: "Like a taut string, like the taut string of a lyre communicates itself to strings that were
previously still"22. Is that what Plotinus says? The harmony of the soul was already one of
Plato's great themes in Phaedo23: how can we save the harmony of the soul, which will allow
us to maintain derived time under the direction of originary time, which originary time will
measure the intensive movement of the soul? This will not be done without prayers; it is no
longer a question of works and days. It's a question of matins and prayers – is that what they
call them: matins, vespers and prayers? In other words, it is no longer rural life, it is monastic
life. And monastic life had... and the question of monastic life played a fundamental… a
fundamental role between the third century… the Neoplatonists themselves were not exempt
from such a movement; there are entire chapters, there is a whole essay by Plotinus on prayer,
in an absolutely unchristian sense, but about prayer nonetheless – this is when the Greeks
introduce a notion of prayer that is completely different from the old prayers to the gods of
polytheism. There is what we call a monasticism, a Neoplatonic monasticism.

How is it achieved? Maintaining an activity down here on earth, of course, while giving
oneself the conditions to save the harmony of the soul, that is to say to save time as number
of the intensive movement of the soul. The monastic life is the other… is another term of the
alternative, salvation. Only, as we know well from history, both rural and monastic life
generated the enemy they were supposed to fight, which was also generated by other means.
Both the monasteries and the rural agglomerations engendered the city to the point where, in

                                                                                               25

a way, agriculture became the invention of the town and not of the peasantry. Agriculture will
only progress by mixing seeds, by forming stocks, which was precisely what occurred in
urban agglomerations, constituting large markets. What rural life claimed to ward off on the
one hand, it produced on the other: daily life, the daily banality of urban time. And monastic
life… everyone knows how the monasteries were one of the other sources of the town − the
town and city arose from all kinds of sources − and monasteries are the source of numerous
cities, the city being constituted around the monastery. Here too, in an extremely moving
vision of history, the monastery gives rise to the enemy it hoped to ward off.

What does this mean, the time of the city? Daily banality ceases to be punctuated by the
seasons and ceases to be harmonized by the monastery. There was daily banality in the work
of the peasant, and in the prayer of the monk; daily banality was constant. But there it was
attuned to the rhythm of the seasons, attuned to the rhythms of nature, or harmonized with
prayers and cults. The city is the unleashing, and that's why to be a philosopher one can only
be a philosopher of the city, now. This is why philosophers always get lost in the big forests.
What do I mean by that? The city is unleashing of daily banality, which is to say, derived
time that has lost all dependence, as much in relation to the extensive movement of the world
as to the intensive movement of the soul. The city is worldless and soulless! That’s the city.

Derived time rises, asserts itself for its own sake, breaks all its moorings. It becomes the only
time that exists; there is only one time, there is no more originary time. Time is out of joint,
off its hinges.24 What were these hinges of time? They were either the privileged positions
through which the moving body passed, namely the cardinal points, or the privileged instants
through which the soul passed. Time is out of joint, this means there is no more originary
time. There is only a derived time. From here on, derived time is no longer a derived time,
once again it is the only time that exists. The time of daily banality, there is no other time
than that of daily banality.

Who is it that becomes aware of this? The one who becomes aware of this, the ones who
become aware of this, are those of the Reformation movement, as Max Weber showed quite
definitively despite the criticisms that were made of him, criticisms that never focused on the
essential of Weber's text, the spirit of Protestantism and capitalism.25 It is with the
Reformation that the question of faith, and the question of daily activity, of the activity of
daily banality, of temporal activity, as Luther says, temporal activity, that is to say, everyday
banality, merge to the point that the word profession… profession takes on the two meanings
we now recognize: profession of faith and professional activity, and a union is established,
one that for both Greeks and Catholics would be a monstrous union of temporal activity,
which is no longer subject to a model, whether this model be that of rhythmic attunement or
that of harmony.

And Luther will not go very far in this sense, for reasons I do not have time to develop, but
on the other hand, Calvin and the Methodists will go very far in this sense. And we will find a
phenomenon analogous to that which Éric analyzed in Aristotle26 namely, this time of daily
banality, which gains complete independence and which makes… which reveal itself to be a
generator of something, a generator of money. Time is the form in which money produces
money, usury, credit, and usury and credit, please God.
What should we conclude from this? We will have to conclude simply that the anomalies in
both extensive and intensive movement became such that time could no longer remain
subordinated to movement. No longer able to remain subordinated to movement, derived time
was unleashed. Derived time thus unleashed, time could no longer have a model; it was time

                                                                                                                26

itself that would become the model of all things and this model would take on another
meaning.

So, the consequences are the following. First: derived time would overthrow originary time,
the only time would become the time of the any-instant-whatever, first consequence. So that
it is movement that would be related to time, that is, to the any-instant-whatever, and no
longer time to movement, that is, to the privileged instant. You see, the two formulas are not
symmetrical: when time is related to movement, this implies that it is related to the privileged
position of the moving body. On the contrary, when movement is related to time, it implies
that it is related to derived time, that is, it is related to the any-instant-whatever, which will be
the basis of the scientific revolution between the 15th and 17th centuries.

Second consequence: it is the whole notion of truth that vacillates − because I’m not planning
to come back to this, it’s up to you to connect it up with what we did in the first term − this
time of nothingness, this time that rushes towards nothingness, this time of the any-instantwhatever, this derived time is precisely the power of the false. The models of truth were the
two models that subjected time, either to extensive movement or to intensive movement, so
here we have a crisis of the very concept of truth!

Final consequence: The daily banality of urban life will become the key problem. All the
powers of the false are unleashed. Rural society disintegrates, our monasteries collapse. We
are in a new element of thought, of the free philosophy which gives itself the task of thinking
this extraordinary spurt of linear time, related to any-instant-whatever, the time of daily
banality, the time of the city, urban time. For all these reasons, philosophy will find itself
confronted with the necessity of constructing direct time-images.

And for all these reasons, cinema, in a completely different way, will find itself with its own
problems, will find itself confronted with the necessity when the sensory-motor chains that
maintained time’s subordination to movement have collapsed, when all sorts of false
continuities have multiplied, when all these marvels of cinema arise. That is to say, after the
war, cinema will find itself faced with the task of constructing direct time-images on its own
behalf. We are at this point: who is the one, the philosopher who first constructed the direct
time-image? It is Kant that I would have liked to work on today, I will do this, very quickly,
after the holidays, and to finish the year we will return to direct time-images in cinema. I
wish you a very good vacation! [End of the recording] [2:38:00]

Notes
  See Marie-Claire Galpérine, “Le Temps intégral selon Damascius” in “Les études philosophiques”, No. 3,
July-September 1980, PUF.
  “Les études philosophiques” is a quarterly journal of philosophy and history of philosophy founded in 1926 by
Gaston Berger and published by PUF (Presses Universitaires de France).
  Here, judging from the context, Deleuze is most probably referring to Leibniz’s reflections on the dangers to
the soul of being confronted with an excess of objective reality, when he writes: “When our soul is brought to a
crossroads of thinking it is always inclined to that side where the greater objective reality is presented; but this
event can be harmful to its perfection and happiness if those realities are very many and very small. This can be
called dissipation of the soul, which happens when we are stupefied and is similar to a body's motion that is lost
because of a blow to the mass, where the impetus is dispersed through innumerable parts of the body. And so we
must fortify ourselves against this dissipation of the soul with the most constant attention to our goal, to certain
general rules of truths, and to the laws of living once prescribed and made familiar to us by repeated use of
thinking and acting.” See Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe, Series VI, Volume 4,
Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften p. 2724 (trans. Lloyd Strickland).

                                                                                                                 27

  Saint Augustine (354-430) ponders the idea of time as a distension of the soul (or mind) – which in some
English editions is translated simply as “extension” or “extendedness” – in chapter 25 of “Time and Eternity”,
the 11th Book of the Confessions. “It may happen that a short line, if pronounced slowly, takes longer to read
aloud than a longer line taken faster. The same principle applies to a poem or a foot or a syllable. That is why I
have come to think that time is simply a distension. But of what is it a distension? I do not know, but it would be
surprising if it is not that of the mind itself.” See Saint Augustine, Confessions, (Trans. Henry Chadwick),
Oxford, New York: Oxford UP, 1991.
  On Pascal's idea of "diversion" see Seminar Cinema 2.22.
  See Claudel's L'art poétique (Paris: Mercure de France, 1907), discussed by Deleuze in the previous seminar.
  Parmenides is often considered one of the most enigmatic among Plato's dialogues. It is set in Athens during a
supposed meeting between Parmenides and Zeno of Elea, the two great philosophers of the Eleatic school, and a
young Socrates. The occasion of the meeting was the reading by Zeno of his treatise defending
Parmenidean monism against the partisans of plurality.
  See Damascius, Problems and Solutions Concerning First Principles, (ed. Sarah Ahbel-Rappe) Oxford: OUP,
2010.
  Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin (1826-1889) is one of the most controversial writers of his day. Described by his
contemporaries as a “writer of sarcasm and corrosive analysis”, he was uncompromising in his biting satirical
attacks on society and the state. His most famous works include the family chronicle novel The Golovlyov
Family (1880) and the political novel The History of a Town (1870).
   See Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin, The Golovlyov Family, The Overlook Press, 2013.
   As certain passages in this intervention are inaudible, for a fuller account of Alliez's remarks on Augustine see
Chapter 3, “The Time of Novitas: Saint Augustine”, pp. 77 -136 in Éric Alliez, Capital Times - Tales from the
Conquest of Time, trans. George Van Der Abeele (Minneapolis, London: Minnesota UP, 1996).
   See Plotinus Ennead III, 7. 11 p. 347.
   The City of God was written about 413–426 CE in response to pagan claims that the sack of Rome by
barbarians in 410 was one of the consequences of the abolition of pagan worship by Christian emperors.
Augustine responded by asserting that Christianity saved the city from complete destruction and that Rome’s
fall was the result of internal moral decay. He outlined his vision of two societies, that of the elect (“the City of
God”) and that of the damned (“the City of Man”). These two cities are symbolic embodiments of the two
spiritual powers – faith and unbelief – that have contended with each other since the fall of the angels. They are
inextricably intermingled on this earth and will remain so until time’s end. The City of God is divided into 22
books: the first 10 refute the claims to divine power of various pagan communities while the last 12 retell the
biblical story of humankind from Genesis to the Last Judgment.
   See Augustine, The City of God, Book 11, Chapter 4.
   Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908-1961) was a French philosopher and public intellectual and the leading
proponent of existentialism and phenomenology in post-war France. Best known for his work on embodiment,
perception, and ontology, he also made important contributions to the philosophy of art, history, language,
nature and politics. Associated in his early years with the existentialist movement through his friendship with
Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, Merleau-Ponty played a central role in the dissemination of
phenomenology, which he sought to integrate with Gestalt psychology, psychoanalysis, Marxism and
Saussurian linguistics.
   The theory of contingent futures (or future contingents) is developed by Aristotle in Chapter 9 of On
Interpretation. The passage to which Deleuze alludes here is the following: “A sea-fight must either take place
to-morrow or not, but it is not necessary that it should take place to-morrow, neither is it necessary that it should
not take place, yet it is necessary that it either should or should not take place to-morrow. Since propositions
correspond with facts, it is evident that when in future events there is a real alternative, and a potentiality in
contrary directions, the corresponding affirmation and denial have the same character.”
   The term palingenesis comes from Ancient Greek παλιγγενεσία (rebirth) – formed from πάλιν (again) and
γένεσις (birth).
   See Edmund Husserl, Leçons pour une phénoménologie de la conscience intime du temps (Paris: PUF, 1964).
   The condemnation Alliez refers to here is the condemnation that took place in 1210, 1270 and 1277, by the
University of Paris, of Aristotle's treatises on physics.
   Pierre Duhem (1861-1916) was a French physicist, historian and philosopher of science. As a physicist, he
championed energetics, holding generalized thermodynamics as foundational for physical theory. In philosophy
of science, he is best known for his work on the relation between theory and experiment, arguing that
hypotheses are not straightforwardly refuted by experiment. Moreover, he wrote groundbreaking work in
Medieval science defending an idea of continuity between medieval and early modern science. See Études sur
Léonard da Vinci (Paris: A. Hermann, 1906-1913).

                                                                                                                28

   Works and Days is a didactic poem written by the ancient Greek poet Hesiod around 700 BC. It is composed
in dactylic hexameter. At its center is a farmer's almanac in which Hesiod instructs his brother Perses in the
agricultural arts. In the poem, Hesiod also offers his brother extensive moralizing advice on how he should live
his life.
   This appears to be Deleuze’s own paraphrase of the following passage from Ennead IV: “As in
the case of a single string that is tensed; for when it has been touched at the lower end, it vibrates at the upper
end, too. And often when one string is touched another experience a sort of sense-perception of that due to their
being in concord and being tuned to a single scale. But if in one lyre a vibration can be transmitted from another,
to the extent that they are in sympathy, so, too, in the universe is there a single harmony, even if it be composed
of opposites; yet it is composed of things that are all the same and akin, even when they are opposites.”
   Phaedo is one of the best-known dialogues of Plato's middle period, along with the Republic and the
Symposium. The philosophical subject of the dialogue is the immortality of the soul. It is set in the last hours
prior to the death of Socrates. In the dialogue, Socrates discusses the nature of after-life on his last day before
being executed by drinking hemlock.
   On this subject, see Deleuze’s reflections on Hamlet in Seminar 12 of February 28, 1984.
   Max Weber (1864-1920) is one of the most important social theorists of the twentieth century, along with
Karl Marx and Emil Durkheim. Weber’s wide-ranging contributions gave critical impetus to the birth of new
academic disciplines such as sociology as well as to the significant reorientation in law, economics, political
science and religious studies. Among his most famous books are The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism (1904-05), Economy and Society (1922) and General Economic History (1923).
   See session 11 of February 7, 1984.