1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema, Truth, and Time: The Falsifier, 1983-1984

Lecture 04, 06 December 1983 (Cinema Course 48)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Fatemeh Malekahmadi (Part 1), Sabine Mazé (Part 2)
and Ingrid Quintana and Yaelle Tannau, revisions: Silvia Maglioni (Part 3); additional
revisions to the transcription and time stamp, Charles J. Stivale

Translation, Billy Dean Goehring

Part 1

… grotesque… the process of [unclear]; I’m vehemently opposed to the ones where you find
statements like these. It’s very hard to not have one pulled over on you by a newspaper. Usually,
I’m pretty careful. They’ve gotten me twice in three months: once by Le Monde, once by
Liberation; that’s plenty.1 Since I still have some respect for people behind this sort of thing,
only with official interviews do I recognize something of myself in the claims newspapers
attribute to me. The rest is despicable. But anyway, I’m only speaking for myself.

And then, another concern I have is to back up a bit; I don’t want to repeat the same thing over
and over again, but rather to pin this down because I really want to get to the part I’ve announced
each time, the part where you’ll have to do the talking, like we usually do. I’d like to pin down
the levels, that is, what I take to be established for us, but also to start off quickly, I’d like to tack
on few other things.

As I see it, we’ve been working toward three themes. Very quickly, our first theme is—right, I’m
not going to get back into it—is the indiscernibility of the real and the imaginary. Once again, all
I’ll say is that this indiscernibility—understand that there cannot be any confusion here, since
later on I’ll ask whether you, as it stands, whether you buy this set-up—this indiscernibility is
different from confusing the imaginary and the real. It’s an indiscernibility, and indiscernibility,
as opposed to confusion, which strictly speaking happens in someone’s mind, indiscernibility is
not something that resides in the mind. Where does it take place? We’ve seen it in a few
formations. There is an indiscernibility between the real and the imaginary whenever the real and
imaginary form a sort of circuit, perpetually chasing each other around, each reflecting the other
around a point or an axis which we might call the axis of indiscernibility. Such that, under the
influence of this indiscernibility between real and imaginary, the most objective and the most
subjective, the objectivity of what’s real and the subjectivity of what’s imaginary, are strictly
indiscernible.

I claimed that this is the main thrust of the New Novel. The trajectory of the New Novel, which
includes having been defined in the most objectivist terms, with the well-known theme of
“purely objective description,” tempered by the idea that this radical objectivism was also the
purest form of subjectivism, as [Alain] Robbe-Grillet would go on to claim. And on this point,

                                                                                                        2

this is the point that becomes so crucial for Robbe-Grillet, I think, regarding the theory of
description he offers us. Again, I’m mainly basing this on a book I’ll come back to often, and
you’ll see why, Robbe-Grillet’s For A New Novel, on page 147: “[…] a description that starts
from nothing; it does not afford, first of all, a general view, it seems to derive from a tiny
fragment without importance […] starting from which it invents lines, planes, an architecture;
and such description particularly seems to be inventing its object when it suddenly contradicts,
repeats, corrects itself, bifurcates, etc. Yet we begin to glimpse something, and we suppose that
this something will now become clearer. But the lines of the drawing accumulate, grow heavier,
cancel one another out, shift, so that the image is jeopardized as it is created.”2 A perfect
description of the circuit I’ve been trying to define, of this point of indiscernibility between the
real and the imaginary. We’ll get to my reasons for using this book later on—in my opinion,
without either influencing the other, there’s another text, a book by Nietzsche, which comes
rather close to saying the same thing, on a subject that’s important for us this year, the theory of
description.

And I argue that Robbe-Grillet’s type of description does make it rather clear that the description
stands in for its object. Such a description is opposed to another type. I suggested that we call
this other type of description “organic description.” Organic description is a description that
posits its object as something independent from it. [Pause] It posits its object as something
independent, even if its object effectively is not independent. I mean, you can see what I’m
talking about: “I saw a unicorn.” My proposition is: I saw a unicorn, [Pause] an animal with a
form, which looks like a horse, etc., or I don’t know, anyway. I saw a unicorn defined as suchand-such, described as such-and-such. There is no unicorn. That doesn’t stop my description of
the unicorn from presupposing the possible existence of the independent object of my
description.

See, what makes description an organic description isn’t some real existence. What defines
organic description is that it posits, the description’s act of positing, positing its object as
something independent, regardless of whether its object is independent or not. Whereas the sort
of description Robbe-Grillet gives us is different; it’s a description that replaces its object. That’s
what’s essential. Hence why Robbe-Grillet [in For a New Novel] opposes two types of
description: one is roughly characterized as a Balzac style of description, organic description,
which emerged in the 19th century, in novels, for example. And he opposes this sort of
description to that of what he calls the New Novel, a description which presents its object in
order to replace it, standing in for its object, instead of presupposing an object posited as
independent, instead of referring back to a supposedly independent object. I want that to be clear
enough to contextualize our move to non-organic description, what I referred to as “crystalline
description,” but with one addendum: that the circuit of the real and the imaginary, where the
imaginary and real become indiscernible, is precisely a crystalline formation.

Thus, you see, again, saying that in the case of—let’s say crystalline—descriptions, the real and
imaginary are indiscernible, or become, rather, I won’t say are, all I can say is that they never
stop becoming indiscernible, in the sense that, ultimately, there is a point of indiscernibility as a
limit point. The circuit traces the real and the imaginary, running them into each other, each
reflecting the other such that they never stop becoming indiscernible. Well, that takes place a

                                                                                                         3

thousand different ways, but what I can say is that, at the very moment where you think it’s the
most objective, it’s subjective, and just when you think it’s the most subjective, it’s objective.

And that’s how it presents itself in the context of cinema. That’s how it is shows up in Last Year
at Marienbad. [Pause] And when Last Year at Marienbad came out, that’s why it was able to
come across as a sort of extension of Italian Neorealism—Neorealism, what does that mean? It
doesn’t mean a new form of realism. It means establishing a reality that’s no longer discernible;
it was opposed to prior realism. Former, older forms of realism boil down to organic description,
that is, if you will, [they’re about] the distinction between the real and the imaginary, or what
amounts to the same, the possibility of their confusion. As we’ve seen. You can only mix up
what can, in principle, be distinguished. Thus, it’s exactly the same thing to say that the real and
imaginary are distinct as it is to say that they can be confused.

We saw that indiscernibility is neither distinction nor confusion. To distinguish and to confuse
are sides of the same coin. You can say that one is right and the other is wrong, but it amounts to
the same. And I believe that Neorealism is a departure from realism. Neorealism comes down to
this emergence of a type of description where the real and imaginary are no longer discernible.
[Pause] A description you could obtain objectively just as easily as you could subjectively. All
that mattered, at any rate, was that there be a circuit where both follow each other.

Take an example like Antonioni. You’ll see, in particular, what need we’ll have for a few
excellent and significant lines from Antonioni, the work of a veritable philosopher. Anyway,
everyone knows, everyone has pointed it out—we’ll have the chance to revisit this throughout
the year, revisiting certain types of images in Antonioni’s work—but I’ll say something obvious.
A lot has been made of the “objective character” of Antonioni’s film. And that’s true. This kind
of analysis includes both society and the feelings portrayed by objective characteristics, those of
detachment most of all. Moreover, it’s been said a thousand times, but what do we find in
Antonioni, in the images themselves? What we get are reports [des constats].3

But what is it that the report serves as an objective form? Likely [the report] is the objective or
objectivist form of description. He uses reports; he always uses reports—reports where the point
isn’t explanation. They aren’t meant to explain what’s happened. They’re kind of like a police
report. [Pause] Well, if you look at The Adventure [1960], The Adventure is a report. It’s the
report, right, of a young woman who’s disappeared. It’s a report. We never know why. We don’t
know what’s become of her, or what have you; it all starts with a simple report. The Cry [1957],
there’s a rift in the couple: report, objective report; it’s really, it’s a kind of objective report that’s
very… and, strictly speaking, not at all—you’ll see why I use this word—not at all sympathetic,
you know? Antonioni always keeps his characters at a distance, not at all sympathetic. Not that
he hates them; it’s like… he’s just pulling up the relevant reports. I know that some critics, some
of Antonioni’s commentators interpreted his work as coming close to some sort of extremely
Marxist method, only applied to feelings, an analysis, an objectivist analysis of feelings or
sentiment.4 Right.

And yet all the same, in a world of “reports” [Pause], something keeps coming loose. What is it
that’s coming loose? The connection between parts, the connection between objective parts of
space. Odd—what forms this [connection]? The connection between parts of space, granted that

                                                                                                       4

Antonioni’s space is very particular, corresponding to what we described in past seminars—I
won’t get into it here—as disconnected spaces, i.e., spaces where parts have no direct
connections.5 It’s as though there was [instead] a juxtaposition between parts with ambiguous
connections, equivocal connections. [Pause] See, these disconnected spaces which we’ve spoken
so much of, there is— compared to other filmmakers, it shows up very clearly in Antonioni,
particularly in The Adventure. There are these extremely beautiful, disconnected spaces: a sliver
of space might be connected one way, [or] connected in some other, indeterminate way. Right.

Well, when it comes to this world of reports, what establishes, what ensures the connection
between objective parts of space? For this sort of space, we have reports. What is there to—what
will be introduced to connect the different parts, the different parts of the space? Always a gaze,
an eye, and not just any eye; it’s always the eye of someone—Why a woman? That’s for him to
say—of someone supposedly distant. In the objective world describing what happens, or rather,
in this objective description focusing on what objectively happens in space, based on a report—
itself objective—what will connect the parts together? The imaginary gaze of someone
supposedly distant. That’s what matters.

For example, in The Adventure, it’s the missing young woman, whose gaze weighs on the
existing couple, on the couple moving through space, both the couple and the space traversed by
the couple are only objectively connected if you assume that they are trying to outrun the
imaginary gaze of the missing woman. In the same way, I’d claim that The Cry, in The Cry, the
poor man’s whole flight takes place under the imaginary gaze of the woman who dumped him, a
gaze that ends up coming back to act on him at the very end, when he’s killed, or at least, when
he lets himself fall into the void.

This is important because—If you like, I’ll take an example from an objective approach. No
matter how objective it starts off, you end up in a subjective turn; based on reality, connections
are forged between different parts of reality, connections which imply imaginary events, such
that a circuit forms. The circuit starts on the objective or real side. If you consider Fellini, I’d say
it’s the opposite; with Fellini, it’s the opposite, but in a certain light, it amounts to the same
thing. They both earn the title [of Neorealist], I think, if you understand what Neorealism means;
it never simply referred to the kind of social environment where characters are situated, where
characters are placed. If his work qualifies as Neo-realism—like the New Novel, the invention of
these real-imaginary circuits—Fellini approaches the problem from the other end.6

When the circuit begins with the imaginary end of the spectrum [Pause] it involves the whole of
what’s real, the real itself having turned into a spectacle. [Pause] It involves different affective
tonalities. I mean, with Antonioni, it’s a kind of—what to call it—of criticism, critical analysis, a
clear form of critical analysis, not just of society but, fundamentally, a critical analysis of
feelings or attitudes [sentiments], [Pause] a critical analysis of decadence. Which I mention
because it will be crucial later on, obviously in the context of Nietzsche, since it’s of particular
interest to him. It’s a critical analysis of decadence. With Fellini, it’s the inverse; his loyalties
were never a secret— That is, the most basic problem for Antonioni — you’ll see what aspect of
this is relevant for us — the main problem for Antonioni is, basically, what is love today for
people who fall in love, rendering them sick, unbalanced, unhappy, miserable? You might think
that’s a funny sort of problem, but that was the problem Antonioni was worried about.

                                                                                                     5

All problems are good problems; from the right perspective, any problem is a good problem.
That’s how he’d ask the question; at the end of the day, it’s a question of society. He doesn’t put
it in terms—it’s interesting; we can all express it however we like, but it ultimately amounts to
the same thing—for him, it’s not a question of how people are exploited. Doubtless, the two
problems overlap. But his way of articulating it, how he immediately experiences it, has more to
do with feelings or attitudes: why is it that [Pause] that love, rather than inspiring us—he thus
talks about true love—makes us need to go get analyzed? [Laughter] That’s it. That’s his
objective analysis of decadence, and we’ll see how and why it’s relevant, what it has to do with
the subject at hand.

Fellini never hid the fact that he was more sympathetic to decadence. He doesn’t take up an
objective critical analysis. He leverages an intense, subjective sympathy, sympathizing even with
decadence. If we were to contrast Fellini’s way of doing things—which I’m trying to pin down—
to Antonioni’s approach, to Antonioni’s problem, which both has a high level of criticism, a
critical objectivity vis a vis what’s happening, and is also very concrete—there was kind of a nod
to Fellini, there. It would have to be more than sympathy, than empathy. We’d need to coin a
new term. With Antonioni it’s all about reports [constats], so what’s the opposite of a report?
We’d have to try something like instat, instat. With Fellini, it comes down to instats. Well, it’s a
kind of instat, a subjective empathy that clings to decadence, saying, “alright, the more the
better.”7

Why? He [Fellini] had held to—I’m not sure if I’ve already talked about it—he held to a phrase
that, unfortunately, I’ve forgotten; it’s an Italian expression for how decadence breeds vibrant
creativity. I can think of a French equivalent, but I’ve forgotten what the Italian was; I was trying
to think of a French word, but I’ve forgotten the Italian. I thought, yeah, there ought to be a word
like “procadence,” and procadence would indicate [Laughter] it’s in the fall – his turn of phrase
was something like that; it was a composite Italian word, right – he has every sympathy for
degeneration, for decadence, and it’s more than just a matter of taste. I think it goes further.
There’s always more than what appears on the surface; perhaps it’s not just because [decadence]
is fun, perhaps decadence is the only way, for him, that something can be saved one day.8

Alright, but what am I getting at? On the one hand, on the side of the imaginary, we have the
spectacle-image; on the other hand, with the real image, the report, etc., but once they meet up,
the two form a veritable real-imaginary circuit in both cases with, in the case of Fellini, the
imaginary becoming real, and in the case of Antonioni, the real becoming imaginary, and in both
cases, it hinges on a point of indiscernibility. That’s what I thought was essential, what I think is
at stake in Robbe-Grillet’s conception of description, when Robbe-Grillet says: if you picture a
description that stands in for its object rather than presupposing it as something independent,
well, first of all, it constantly erases its object, it constantly banishes its object, and thereby it
creates its reality. The imaginary is constantly feeding into and coming out of the real. But even
that’s not quite right, because that would presuppose that the real stays in place, and it does no
such thing. Each one constantly swaps places in one way or another; they’re swapped in one way
with Antonioni and in another way with Fellini.

                                                                                                       6

So, that’s my first point: in a nutshell, it’s precisely as if the real image were coupled with its
virtual image, with both joining together in a circuit, a circuit in which they become
indiscernible. The circuit between the real image and the virtual image is such that it establishes
the indiscernibility of the real and the imaginary. There we go, through this lens, that’s our goal
for a theory of descriptions. That’s our first point.

The second point—be careful—there isn’t only an indiscernibility between the real and the
imaginary in certain formations, formations, again, we ought to call—we’ll need to take a closer
look—which I just redefined, yet again, so that hopefully it won’t be the least bit ambiguous. At
a second level of consideration, there is—and the two [levels] are obviously connected, but the
first, which we just looked at, is only the necessary condition for the second, even deeper level—
it’s no longer the indiscernibility between the real and the imaginary but the indiscernibility
between the true and the false [or “the real and the fake”], the indiscernibility between the true
and the false, and then it isn’t a question of description but a question of narration. And we’ll
define a true or truthful narration as one where true and false [“real and fake”] are decidable,
[Pause] whereas a falsifying or fraudulent narration or the power of the false [is] a narration
where true and false are strictly undecidable.9 And this undecidability struck me as a wholly
positive characteristic qua undecidability, provided it’s under circumstances where it can take on
meaning.

And we saw last time that the undecidability between true and false plays on two paradoxes, or
rather, two aspects of paradox. The first side, which I won’t get back into, is that the impossible
derives from the possible; the first logical paradox, just like how in the first level, I… here, you
cannot discern between the real and the imaginary, my first paradox for defining the
undecidability between the true and the false: you can get the impossible out of what’s possible.
And the second side of that same paradox is that you can—yeah, I’ll go over it again—you can
derive the impossible from the possible, depending on how we define the possible. How to
define it? As what is true or what will be true. The possible is what is true or what will be true.
You’re able to derive the impossible from the possible, the first side of the Ancient paradox, the
master paradox that I spent so long developing last time; and the second side of the paradox is
that what is or what was isn’t necessarily true [or “real”]. [Pause] See, the first side of the
paradox is that the impossible comes from what is true or what will be true; the second side of
the paradox is that what is or what was isn’t necessarily true. Notice the role that time plays in
both forms of the paradox.

And I claim, right, that all the powers of the false spin out from between these two extremes,
between these two extreme propositions. It’s on that basis—and this was our focus last time, so I
won’t dwell on it again—that the undecidability between the true and the false is established. I
claimed that indeed, to take another example from cinema, it’s clear that [Orson] Welles,
throughout his career, explored the question of what’s true and what’s false, not from the
perspective of these terms having disappeared, but from the perspective of their undecidability.
That’s what he was after; that’s what he was always getting at. I’d almost argue that—even
though I can’t explain until later on, when we talk about time in film, especially in Welles’s
films—I’d argue that the entire story, the entire plot of The Lady from Shanghai [1947] more or
less corresponds to the first side—the impossible derives from the possible—and everything

                                                                                                       7

about Mr. Arkadin [or Confidential Report, 1955] corresponds to the other side—that what is or
what was is not necessarily true.

And, as we saw, these are the two extremes, the two major forms of the fraud or falsifier.10 The
falsifier is, on the one hand, someone who derives something impossible from the possible, and
on the other hand, someone for whom what’s happened isn’t necessarily true. Right. [Pause]
That was the second level. It’s bound up with the first because ultimately the undecidability
between the true and the false is what one “sees”; it’s precisely what the eye sees in crystalline
formations; the crystalline formation is characterized by the undecidability between the real and
the imaginary.

Well, for now, let’s assume all that is true. What would the third level be? [Pause] Well, it’s that
truth enters into crisis, that is, the concept of truth is submerged in the powers of the false, one
and two—that is, what I’m calling the crisis of the concept of truth, speaking for myself—the
“crisis in the concept of truth” means truth faces a twofold phenomenon: the indiscernibility of
the real and the imaginary, and the undecidability between true and false. Then truth starts to lose
its footing. Neither of its legs are steady; both begin to tremble; both begin to give way. Thus,
the concept of truth begins to falter, since our task is… it falters, ultimately. It’s supposed to, it
should falter, it ought to falter. Note that I mean “crisis of truth” in a very precise sense; I don’t
mean just any sort of crisis.

So, I’m saying, right, this is the sort of crisis truth undergoes, very precisely defined in the two
aforementioned ways. When? Not only when it’s faced with existence or something that exists,
i.e., when it stops being the truth of essence and becomes the truth of existence, but when it
encounters existence in the form of Time and the different kinds of Time. [Pause]

What does that mean? What does it mean that time determines the crisis of truth, the crisis such
as we’ve just described? [Pause] A quick confirmation: all the filmmakers invested in the
indiscernibility between the real and the imaginary or in the undecidability between the true and
the false, are precisely the main filmmakers to have introduced time-images into cinema the most
directly. Is it a coincidence, again, that Welles created the first cinema of time and was so
interested in the impossibility of figuring out what is true or false? Is it a mere coincidence, or
are these two themes connected? Is it the same thing as, likewise, [Alain] Resnais—is it a
coincidence that he creates such a peculiar sort of time-image in his films, while taking up, in a
different way, in different forms, Welles’s basic problem, the undecidability between true and
false?

Can it be said that these two themes just happen to coincide? Certainly not. Why? Because,
again, it is time that puts truth in crisis, in this double crisis; which is why I say we’ve come to
our third aspect: time as what motivates this crisis. And our first two aspects—see, things are
getting clearer and clearer, crystal clear, even, for once; it’s surprising—our first two aspects
were the two forms of the crisis of the concept of truth, from a certain point of view. Sure, there
are plenty of others, but this is what I’m concerned with.

And so that’s the third aspect: [Pause] what causes this crisis? Our answer is time. Which means
what? It happens when truth confronts not just what exists, but when it confronts time. You

                                                                                                     8

might think that’s the same thing. No, not at all—time might be a dimension of what exists, but it
isn’t the same thing as what exists. It’s when it confronts time that truth is made to falter and
enters into crisis. But what does that mean? Again, we’ve exhausted the simpler interpretation
that would say, well, sure, it’s very simple, truth changes over time. We did say, truth would
never be in crisis if it was simply a matter of changing content, for one simple reason. Recognize
that a change in content obviously doesn’t affect the form of what’s true. At one moment, I
believe that the sun revolves around the earth; next, I believe that the earth revolves around the
sun. Alright. That’s significant. I’m certainly not saying that it doesn’t matter. There are a lot of
significant things we overlook, if we’re focusing on the problem. Every problem is its own
separate concern. It’s significant, but it doesn’t affect the “form” of truth. All I’m saying is that,
once we establish that it’s the sun that revolves around the earth—I’m really simplifying things
here—at that point, right, we were, we were mistaking the false for what’s true.

At any rate, the false has no form. Only what’s true has a form, as we, as the Classics are always
reminding us. They’re right. There is no form other than that of what’s true. There is a power of
the false. There is no form of the false, by definition. Alright. Errors never have any bearing on a
form of the false. Errors have to do with the content of what’s true, they don’t affect… Sorry, I
mean that they don’t affect the form of what’s true. Then I’d be forced to say that truth changes
all the time. So long as I’m thinking in terms of content, there’s no good reason to problematize
the concept of truth, the form of what’s true. [Pause]

I’m saying that what calls—the plot thickens—what calls the concept of truth into question is
time in its pure form, the pure form of time is what calls into question the form of what’s true.
What is the pure form of time? Is there a pure form of time? In any event, it’s time independent
of content, independent of whatever is in time. I’m not referring to something in time, something
that’s true at one point in time and stops being true at another; I mean the form of time itself, and
I claim that it’s the form of time that puts the concept of truth in crisis. What does that mean,
exactly, since I’ve thrown out content? It means that if there is a form of time, right, I’m
distinguishing it from chronological time. It’s the form of time, hence it isn’t chronological; it’s
an aspect of time deeper than chronology. [Pause]

Then, rather than, let’s call it, yeah, let’s get rid of “form,” since that muddies the water, instead,
let’s call it the “core” [fond] of time.11 That’s better. Yeah, everything’s starting to get clearer.
The “core of time,” being non-chronological, is what calls the form of what’s true into question
or sends it into crisis, on both sides, since we saw that this crisis had two different aspects. It is
the core of time—only what is the core of time? Obviously, I wouldn’t say, for example, in film
where Welles invented the time-image, if all that meant was that he imposed chronological time
onto cinema, since time qua chronological time has always existed in cinema, not only at the
level of the cinema-machine but at the level of what’s on screen. And the content of time, such as
is marked by time, has always existed—rather, [what he invented was] a pure image of time, that
is, an image of time’s core qua non-chronological time and, at the same time, qua time.

That, I claimed, in my opinion, is the essence of three… That’s where I ended, I forget when—
I’m always circling back to where I left off last time, huh?12—Right, this is what’s characteristic
of three, as I see it, what characterizes the big three: it’s there in Welles, the founder, the
originator; it’s there in Resnais, notably in I Love You, I Love You [1968] with its hypersphere,

                                                                                                           9

which—based on what he calls “beyond time”—which specifically highlights the time’s nonchronological core, wholly in relation to the power of the false; and finally, [it’s there in] the
cinema of the third-world, if that means anything in this context, with respect to [Pierre] Perrault,
but that’s something for another day.

I’ll add that if that’s so, if the core of time is responsible for the crisis in the concept of truth in
both, in both senses, and well, right, well, I’m assuming that you’re with me so far, that it’s the
core of time—you’ve granted me a lot of things so far, not too much, by any stretch, not too
much, since I’ve backed it all up; and then, there is, if you don’t grant me this, we’re headed
toward disaster, so it’s in your best interest to play along—what am I trying to say, then? Deny
even a single premise, and the whole thing will fall apart…!

Well, what was the last, in my opinion, the last sublime effort to salvage the concept of truth?
[Pause] There was one commendable effort to save the concept of truth, hence I attributed so
much importance to it last time: Leibniz. However, we’ll see that his project and its character
will teach us, will take us a step further. We weren’t asking so much of… [Interruption of the
recording] [45:53]

Part 2

… in each one, a different Sextus, a different Adam. You’ll recall that Leibniz’s grand vision
consisted in saying: Yes, yes, truth undergoes a—undergoes a trial when it confronts what exists.
A crisis, in other words. Leibniz acknowledges the crisis of the concept of truth, describing it as
truth “colliding” or falling into crisis when [Pause] it ceases to be the truth of essence and
becomes the truth of existence. An example of a truth of essence might be: a triangle’s angles
add up to two right angles or two plus two is four. A truth of essence might be: Adam sinned, or
Sextus was a poor ruler, and so on.

How do we salvage truth when it comes to what actually exists? His answer: sure, everything is
possible, implicitly, everything non-contradictory is possible. In other words, truths of essence
can afford any possible existence. Everything is possible. Everything is possible, but you
won’t—and this is what saves the concept of truth—you won’t be able to derive the impossible
out of what’s possible. Whereby, for those who remember from last time, Leibniz’s philosophy
at this point lines up directly with Ancient philosophy, with the so-called “master” argument.13
You can’t get… everything is possible, but you’ll never be able to derive the impossible from the
possible. Why? He says that it’s because, surprisingly, creatively, in a response like, if you
will—if there were such a thing as a philosophical painting, this would be the most beautiful
scene philosophy could ever, ever depict. He invents a suitable concept: the concept of
incompossibility. He says sure, everything is possible, but not all possibilities are mutually
compossible.

In other words, it’s possible that one Adam didn’t sin. [Pause] The application, the confrontation
between truth and existence forces us to say, yes, it’s possible. It’s not like with essences. A
triangle whose two angles don’t add up to two right angles isn’t possible—that’s impossible—
but it’s possible that Adam didn’t sin, or that Sextus didn’t go to Rome. That’s very possible.
However, that wouldn’t be compossible with our world. Our world entails that—in our world,

                                                                                                  10

it’s implied that Adam has sinned… Adam has sinned. A non-sinner Adam is possible in another
world, but our two worlds are incompossible.

Note how astonishing this is, because it implies that there isn’t simply a contradiction between
Adam as a sinner and Adam as a non-sinner; the relationship is one of incompossibility by way
of their respective worlds. Sinning Adam belongs to one world, and non-sinning Adam belongs
to another world; the two are incompossible. Hence Leibniz’s cry of relief—you can picture him
crying out in relief—thank goodness! He’s resolved the master paradox in a whole new way. He
says no! The impossible is never derived from the possible! On the contrary, what we get from
the possible is the incompossible. That is, everything is possible, but not all possibles are
compossible; from what’s possible, we get the incompossible.

And he judges that this does indeed save truth. And it is—that was the goal of, of… that’s why
you needed to dig into this wonderful piece from Leibniz; you needed to, you really need to read
it. First because it’s such a beautiful, such a modern type of story, since it’s an intricate story
made up of stories. Well, it’s quite lovely, it’s all so lovely… this whole world, all these little
parts… – for fans of Raymond Roussel, it reminds you of Raymond Roussel—with the glass
cages, the little men gesturing, performing feats, marvelous feats… That’s exactly what happens
with Leibniz here, in all these little parts of the pyramid… every compartment has a number.
Then we find a book, and every number corresponds to a page of the book, and the pages
correspond to everything that happens in the world, wherein you have Adam the sinner in
number one, you turn to page one—in a book with thousands of pages—and you learn that Adam
the sinner is compossible with the world where Julius Caesar did such and such, as part of the
same world. But that that’s incompossible with another world where Julius Caesar didn’t do that.
It’s a real delight, a real delight to read.

But what is Leibniz telling us here? He has demonstrated one thing and hid another. He’s
demonstrated that in order to save the concept of truth, he had to bring in morality. That doesn’t
seem, that doesn’t seem like much, I kept it from you last time, [Laughter] I ran out of time, I
didn’t have enough time to bring up morality. Why? Everything is possible, but not everything is
compossible. In other words, [Pause] there are multiple, even infinitely many possible worlds,
but they aren’t an infinite number of mutually compossible worlds. There is a world where Adam
doesn’t sin, there’s a world where Adam listens to the serpent but is able to resist, there’s a world
where there isn’t even a serpent at all, there’s a world where the serpent, so on and so forth.

But why does God choose one world over another? Leibniz’s solution is well-known: God
chooses the best possible world. He chooses the best one. For Leibniz, the “best” is obviously a
moral category, but it’s mathematical too; it’s moral-mathematical, moral-scientific. The concept
of truth is bound up with—and here attests that it might always have been the case—is deeply
tied to morality. Why is “best” a mathematical category? The famous laws, in mathematics and
physics, the so-called optimal laws. Why is this the best possible world? He says, well, the world
God chooses is necessarily the best possible world—there are no other criteria. The best possible
world only means the one containing the greatest quantity of reality, the greatest quantity of
perfection, the greatest quantity of dreams.

                                                                                                    11

You might ask what the other [worlds] are supposed to be. Leibniz immediately says, yeah, that,
well, the other worlds—make no mistake, right, you can bet that they’re a lot worse. So, to
people who still claim that things would be better if Adam hadn’t sinned, Leibniz will say, will
respond, no, things would have been a lot worse; they would have been a lot worse, since Adamthe-sinner is part of the best possible world. He proves it by saying: a world where Adam doesn’t
sin would have been a world without Redemption, there wouldn’t have been any Redemption,
and Redemption is one of the elements, is one of the aspects, of the world God chose, the best
possible world.

Using “the best” as a rule, then, Leibniz is able to save truth, solving for the controversy of
“deriving the impossible from the possible” in a reassuring and ingenious proposal—“No, only
incompossibles derive from what’s possible.” [Pause] But on the other hand, if Leibniz was
hiding— right? -- if Leibniz alleged and recognized and required a profound link between the
concept of truth and morality, what is he hiding? He’s concealing the fact that truth doesn’t
confront what exists without confronting time’s core, [Pause] without confronting the core of
time, [hiding the fact] that time had a core, i.e., that time’s substance was non-chronological.

That’s right, it amounts to saying that the substance of time is non-chronological. Yeah, that
means a non-chronological substance of time. Thus, the core of time is time’s non-chronological
substance. And that’s what he glossed over—why avoid it? Because, like another author we
discussed last time, he doesn’t use the word “time.”14 He has several reasons for not using the
word, “time.” The simplest reason is that Leibniz understands time as solely chronological. In
other words, time isn’t a substance; time has no foundation or core—that’s the Classical
understanding. The notion that time is rooted in something, that the substance of time is nonchronological—we’re moving ahead a bit, but that won’t come until the Romantics. In that light,
we’re all heirs to the Romantics. But for a Classic philosopher, time is a question of succession,
i.e., time is a mode—by definition, the chronological mode. And if he hadn’t bypassed time, if he
had come to the chilling, horrifying, absolutely terrifying conclusion that time’s substance was
non-chronological, that time was rooted in something, how would he have reacted? He would
have said that no, incompossibles belong to the same world via the “core of time.”
Incompossibles belong to the same world.

In other words, our world, this world, contains every incompossibility and every bifurcation you
could imagine. Bifurcation no longer refers to a separation between incompossible worlds; now
our world contains every possible incompossibility and bifurcation, which is Borges’s response
to Leibniz across the centuries. The result is that Borges’s insight, borrowed from the Chinese—
the core of time, time’s non-chronological substance—makes it so that all incompossibilities
reside within this world. [Pause] And, in the depths of time, we’re sometimes friends, sometimes
enemies, sometimes one of you kills me, and sometimes I kill one of you, and it changes every
time, I… etc., etc. It’s the garden with forking paths, or the labyrinth, only now it’s a labyrinth of
a straight line, that is, time in its pure, purest form, such as what emerges from the depths [fond]
of non-chronological time. That’s why I emphasized this passage, with this marvelous author
who gave us the key to this passage, namely, the serial novels of Maurice Leblanc.15

But what am I ultimately trying to say? Well, I can say, with this third point, I’m able to reach
the conclusion that… remember, it’s time. My third conclusion was that time, at its core and in

                                                                                                 12

its non-chronological substance, is responsible for the crisis of truth, a crisis in both of its
aforementioned aspects, in both senses. [Pause] My final conclusion is, fourth, that, okay, what
is it that initiates and maintains such a fundamental relationship between truth and time? It’s
morality. [Pause] Morality. [Pause] And we are all affected by morality. [Pause]

Which makes morality rather ambiguous. In a way, it appears to be the foundation for truth, but
in a more profound sense, as we’ll see, it’s what confronts truth with time and leads it into the
mother of all crises. This new development is what I want to flesh out for you—before you
commence your discussions, as I hope you will. So, this, this is what I’m trying to say. Let me
back up…

Here I have a few texts in mind because it’s still complicated; it’s all rather complicated. It goes
without saying that it’s complicated. I’m pulling from two texts that I really like, two texts from
Antonioni, and both passages bear out what I’m talking about when I say, you know, whether it’s
filmmakers or, or whether it’s painters, and so on, it’s exactly the same as with philosophers—I
mean, there are some real thinkers, tremendous thinkers. On the other end, it would be great if
philosophers would paint a little now and then. Okay, I’m thinking about two interviews with
Antonioni. For this, I need them both.

The first is rather straightforward and rather funny, I think it’s pretty funny. He’s asked, “What’s
your relationship to Neorealism? How do you situate yourself vis à vis Neorealism?” And he
says, well, that’s easy, you know—Neorealism, he says, turns on the actual relationship between
a character and their social reality. Which is totally wrong, in my opinion, and he knows it, but
that’s neither here nor there; that’s not what Neorealism is really about, but who cares. From the
very beginning, again, Neorealism has been permeated by the indiscernibility between real and
imaginary, which is easy enough to prove. Certainly, it appears that way; certainly, you could put
it that way. You could say that Neorealism begins with a character in a social situation, and
people always cite, people always point back to either Rossellini or The Thief… Bicycle Thieves
[De Sica, 1948], right. But it wasn’t like that even then; even back then, it wasn’t about that at
all, and you can tell right away. From the very beginning, Neorealism was about—I think this
would be our proof—was about presenting a new type of image that depicted, that highlighted
the indiscernibility between the real and the imaginary.

What I’m saying is that, fundamentally, Neorealism is—as I discussed in previous years16—
Europe 51 [1952]. It’s [Pause] when the bourgeoise woman visits a factory, a real factory, a real
image, and says—she’s appalled, she’s never been to a factory—she’s appalled, and she says,
“What I saw were prisoners.” “What I saw were prisoners”—and that forms a circuit. I don’t
mean that images have been superimposed; Rossellini was clever enough to avoid that. What
comes about is a mysterious circuit between the actual image (the factory) and the virtual image
(“What I saw were prisoners”). That—that’s the indiscernibility: a factory is indiscernible from a
prison. That’s the art of Neorealism. It has nothing to do with... anyway.

Or there’s Stromboli [1950]. Stromboli, where the further the foreign woman ventures into the
reality of the island, up to the volcanic eruption, the further she proceeds in her own mental
exploration, until both are united—her mental exploration and the exploration of the island—
then the volcano erupts, and she, rather than descending, climbs—climbs up the volcano rather

                                                                                                  13

than climbing down, crying “I’m done for, it’s so beautiful.” And then both, that is… “It’s over,
my God, how beautiful, it’s all over”—I don’t remember, you get the idea—then, if you like,
everything salient in the virtual image, what’s in her head, and everything salient in the real
image, all the successive layers and aspects of the island, form a kind of demented circuit that
brings her to her knees. Everything has become indiscernible: “It’s so beautiful, it’s all over.”
That’s the point of indiscernibility, the point of no return! What is true, what is false, what is
real, that—that is Italian Neorealism.

And in the end, that’s comparable to saying—and I suppose Antonioni puts it that way because
he’s getting at something else—he says that, in the end, what I represent, and here he gets really
spiritual, he basically says, what I represent is Neorealism without the bicycle. [Laughter] It’s
Neorealism without bikes, I’ve taken out the bike. He basically says that’s why it’s no longer as
important—doesn’t feel as important—it feels like it’s no longer important, it no longer matters
today if you make a film about a man whose bike was stolen, i.e., about a character whose
significance hinges on the fact that their bike was stolen. He says that’s no longer interesting; he
says it did very early on, but I think that even at the start, there’s something else at issue; it
wasn’t stealing a bicycle, it was about something completely different.

“Now that we have today eliminated the problem of the bicycle”—It’s amazing, he goes on—“I
am using a metaphor, try to understand beyond my words.” In other words, like a philosopher,
but not metaphorically. He’s not actually speaking metaphorically. A bicycle, right, a wellknown example. Now what he’s saying, what he’s interested in, instead of the bicycle—he’s
moved beyond the little bike, because “it’s important to see what there is in the heart and mind of
the man whose bicycle has been stolen.” Today what’s important is seeing, he says, after the
early days of Neorealism, “it’s important to see what there is in the heart and mind of the man
whose bicycle has been stolen,” how he’s adapted, “how he has adapted”—past tense—“what
has stayed with him out of all his past experiences with the war, its aftermath, everything that has
happened in our country,” a country that, like so many others, has come out the other side from
something so grave and significant.17

What is he trying to tell us? He’s saying that the early sort of Neorealism was impressive, but it
didn’t account for the problem of time, it accounted for movement: the bicycle. It was still a
cinema of movement. See, it doesn’t matter, it doesn’t matter if he’s right or not. There’s a
temptation to jump in and say no, that’s wrong, that’s not wrong. Let’s say that early Neorealism
dealt with issues surrounding what’s real, what’s imaginary, and whether they’re indiscernible or
not, but it didn’t get to the problem of time as something that provokes crisis. What is the
problem of time? It’s no longer about learning what someone will do once their bike is stolen.
That sort of thing has been done for ages. “It’s important to see what’s in the heart and mind of
the man whose bicycle has been stolen, how he’s adapted,” how he’s adapted to it, “what has
stayed with him,” for example, “of his past experiences with the war,” it is time to swap out
movement, time to replace it with time, and to replace the problem of movement with the
problem of time.

Let’s consider why. What makes the problem of time so urgent? It’s because time is something
terrible. [Pause] And on that point, I’m moving on—the writing gets a little confusing, but it’s so
great—I’m moving on to another piece from Antonioni. Both of the sources I’m using are

                                                                                                  14

included in Leprohon’s book on Antonioni, published through Seghers. So, the writing is rough.
You’ll see. My question is: in a completely different way, don’t we find something equivalent in
Nietzsche? By and large, yes. This second bit from Antonioni is, I think, unmistakably
Nietzschean. [Pause]

You’re with me, yeah? You all can see where I’m going with this and why I’m bringing up time?
The reason is that time, right, if it puts the notion of truth in crisis, it’s because—this is only a
first step—it’s a real mess; time is a real mess. There is something… there’s something
incredible about time, something incredible that haunts us. Maybe that doesn’t make it a mess; it
might even be the most beautiful thing in the world, if we reach non-chronological substance,
you know, at the root of time. Nevertheless, time is… it’s awful. Awful.

What’s so awful about time?18 “From birth”—this is why—"As soon as they’re born, a person is
saddled with the burden of a sensibility” [Pause]—he’s talking about feeling, sensibility; I’m
taking him literally, right?—"Feelings are linked to time.” Time is accompanied by certain
feelings. No sooner than we are born does time saddle us with sentiments or feelings. Things are
already pretty obscure; it’s not clear what he means. We should see where he goes with this…
You can tell he has a vision. It’s not… Again, it would be stupid to argue whether it’s right or
wrong; trying to understand what he means is challenging enough. Let’s hear him out for… we’ll
try to understand what Antonioni is telling us. Myself, as soon as I’m born, I immediately,
immediately find myself burdened by these sentiments. And that’s my being in time. [Pause]
“[These sentiments] can’t exactly be called outdated and outmoded”—and yet that’s what he
says later on. Because later, to keep us on our toes, he contradicts himself. The word’s meaning
will change in the interim, though he doesn’t say so. “These sentiments, this sensibility”—we
find ourselves weighed down by so many sentiments—“They’re not so much old and outmoded
as they are completely unsuitable”—unsuitable—“conditioning us without guiding us, hindering
us without showing us how to get around them.” Feels like it’s starting to get original. How is it
original? Simply because it backs us up; it confirms what we’ve been saying. We said that it
wasn’t about content. When the concept of truth comes into question, it wasn’t about knowing
whether people believed this rather than that three hundred years ago, whether they thought this
or that was true. That’s only about content. [Pause]

What does Antonioni think? [He thinks that] what we ought to interrogate is the form of time, the
form of time being defined as follows: that which expresses time’s non-chronological substance,
or time’s foundation [fond]. Antonioni is trying to say that what’s terrible about time is that it
leaves us with—it imposes—from the moment we’re born, it burdens us with all this baggage,
these feelings, these unsuitable sentiments that condition us without guiding us, that hinder us
without showing us how to get around them. “They’re not so much old and outmoded
[feelings].” That is, it’s not a question of simply saying, okay, once I’m born, I’m burdened by
old moral attitudes; my parents impose their old moral values on me. No. That might be the case,
but it’s very limited. On the one hand, it’s likely false; on the other hand, it’s beside the point.
It’s a platitude. It has nothing to do with anything. Antonioni cannot—when you come across a
platitude when reading, when what you’re reading is written by someone great, you say, “I must
be mistaken; that can’t possibly be what he meant.” Here he makes it clear: “They’re not so
much old and outmoded [feelings].” In other words, we don’t mean—when we say that what
makes time awful is that it burdens us with unsuitable feelings or sentiments—we’re not talking

                                                                                                  15

about time in its chronological sequence, as if that were what burdens us with old or outmoded
feelings. No, what he’s interested in is the form of time. [Pause] It’s with regard to its form and
not particular old or outmoded content; it through its form as time that time burdens us with
unsuitable feelings or sentiments.

Insofar as we are in time, we are fundamentally unsuited, fundamentally constrained. Oh, hold
on, however, if we read ahead—“Because, I repeat, the present moral standards we live by, these
myths, these conventions are old and obsolete. And we all know they are, yet we honor them.
Why?” What a pickle. It’s a disaster. Because I just finished explaining how we specifically
aren’t talking about its being old and obsolete, and he explicitly says as much at first.

And then, ten lines down, he tells us: “I repeat”—he said it at the beginning—“I repeat, the
present moral standards we live by, these myths, these conventions are old and obsolete.”
Suddenly, what’s bad about time is that it makes us believe in things that are no longer true, in
obsolete moral standards. Well shit, close the book, it’s a lost cause. Well, hold on, we can’t
think of it like that. What might he mean, then? We live by… They don’t come from us; it’s
time—time provides them, time provides us with obsolete moral standards, myths, conventions.
And yet it’s not—bearing the first part in mind—and yet it’s not because its contents are old or
obsolete. It’s owing to its form, the state of its form, as the expression of its non-chronological
foundation. What is the form of time, burdening us with obsolete moral standards, moral
standards which are obsolete the moment we’re born? This antiquated sort of morality boils
down to two words: “you must.” “You must.” And there’s no contradiction between this and
when Antonioni says, “They’re not so much old and outmoded as they are completely unsuitable,
conditioning us without guiding us,” and so on. He means that, of the obligations and moral
standards foisted upon us as soon as we’re born, he’s not referring to any of them in particular.

When he says, ten pages—no, ten lines down—"the present moral standards we live by, these
myths, these conventions are old and obsolete,” he’s not contradicting himself at all. He means
that the form of time is the “you must,” the form of time as it expresses the non-chronological
core of time. Its form is simply “you must.” It doesn’t matter what I “must” do—in one period I
ought to do this, in another period I ought to do that—that’s what chronology is. That’s what
might be old or obsolete. But there is something older than any old or obsolete particular. What’s
older and even more obsolete than any content carried through time, through chronological
succession, is the very form of “you must,” no matter what it is that I “must” do. It’s the ancient
form, through time, by way of its form, as the expression of its non-chronological substance, that
makes “you must” a point, full stop. What must I do? It doesn’t matter. “You must.” “You
must.” Whatever it is—“you must,” “you must choose,” “you must,” “you must.” So, you see,
his argument starts to get more rigorous.

For me, the payoff, what struck me as crucial, is that what fundamentally binds truth and time
together turns out to be morality. What fundamentally binds truth and time together is morality,
in the form of “you must.” Why? Because the “you must” is always already there, throughout all
existence. The “you must” is a given, always already there, that feeds on the non-chronological
substance at the root of time. You might think that none of this is all that clear. I’ll try to
articulate what he’s saying a bit more clearly—the series that can… “You must,” right. [Pause]
There’s just me, as something that exists, and existing through time tells me that “you must,” as

                                                                                                    16

something given in advance; see, we’ve moved beyond thinking about outdated content to a
form, the form of something given in advance, as if the “you must” rose up from the depths
[fond] of time and lie in wait for every living thing.

And then Antonioni tells us, well, alright, [Pause] we live by old and obsolete moral standards,
myths, and conventions, and we’re fully aware of it. Why do we respect them? Because, he
adds—and this is the crux of the matter for him—it isn’t a question of knowledge. In the realm
of knowledge, ultimately, truth doesn’t see itself as being in crisis. It’s the opposite of what we
usually say. Antonioni is here actually pretty refreshing, because I think he’s right. We always
talk about a crisis in knowledge. But for knowledge, strictly speaking, it makes no difference;
there is no crisis whatsoever. Antonioni says, but with knowledge, you know, “Man is quick to
rid himself of his technological and scientific mistakes and misconceptions.” In other words—
you can’t say it changes nothing—something changes, but perhaps not when it comes to our
relationship with time. When Einstein’s understanding of space more or less replaced Newtonian
space, obviously a lot of things changed as a result. Sure. Does that change our relationship with
what it means to be true? Does that affect our relationship with what it means to be true?

When quantum physics arrives on the scene, okay, then you might say that that brings about the
atom bomb, but does the bomb itself really change how we relate to things, or is the bomb the
means whereby something else is revealed? From the point of view of scientific knowledge,
whether we have it or we don’t, Antonioni says, is hardly the problem; we have no problem
discarding one scientific belief for the sake of another. No sweat. Otherwise, there would only be
a problem with content. Well, the state of science today, right, doesn’t pose many problems.
When it comes to science, science has never been so humble, so willing to retract, but when it
comes to moral attitudes or sentiments, what we find is an absolute conformism. Interesting.19

If one morning you wake up to learn that, okay, today a new particle has been discovered;
they’ve discovered a new particle, and as a result a whole part of physics is no longer true, no
longer holds, is called into question—sure, you’re fine with that. You say, okay, very well, it’s
no big deal. It might be a catastrophe for scientists, but for different reasons. So, science has
never been so humble, so willing to retract, and ultimately science isn’t what frustrates us,
science isn’t what annoys us so much, but in the domain of feelings or sentiments, we find utter
conformism. Alright. So, now, what’s pressing isn’t a straightforward problem of content or
changes in content; what we’re facing is a question of form. Okay. [Pause]

And so he says, we know the moral sentiments we’re burned with from the moment we’re born
are totally unsuitable, that they condition us without guiding us, that they are unhelpful, that they
make us neurotic or worse. Again, it’s no longer a question of changing content, it’s about the
form of “you must,” insofar as it weighs on us and emerges from the depths of time. He tells us
that it serves no purpose. How do we get away from it? It doesn’t do anything for us but lead us
into states of conflict, pathological states. It makes us sick. It makes us sick. You might think
that I’m exaggerating, that it doesn’t make us sick. It does, Antonioni says, who is getting more
and more interesting, because, at best, we find a tiny way of escaping, we find a tiny way of
escaping. He says, okay, all these “you musts”? Enough is enough. [Laughter] So, we treat it like
something outdated, and we say: “I’m so clever, I’ve figured it out,” and it’s the most pathetic
trick in the world; it’s the feeblest trick in the world, a trick—I’m stressing this point because I’ll

                                                                                                    17

come back to it later—is doubtless what transforms love into pure misery, in a purely neurotic
process. And here we get the whole thrust, the entire thrust of his filmmaking.

What do we make of the fact that love produces and leads people to such pitiful, such
pathological, such desperate behavior? So, we find, yes, we find a way, but our little trick for
avoiding the “you must” is worse than the “you must” itself. And, since this comes from a
commentary on L’Avventura, on The Adventure, he uses The Adventure as an example. He says,
see, the heroes are subjected to the “you must”—he doesn’t say it in so many words; I, I, I’m
tightening it up to…—they’re subjected to the “you must.” More specifically, the man’s fiancée
has gone missing, and the “you must” here is that he must get her back. [Interruption of the
recording] [1:31:51]

… original, space whose parts are disconnected, etc., not because the connections can only be
drawn from the perspective of the girl who’s still missing, that is, can only be drawn with an
imaginary eye.

Right, well, nobody believes it. Strangely, they do a sort of abstract ballet on that rocky island,
very lovely, admirable, but no one is really looking. However, the two main interested parties,
the girl’s fiancé and the girl’s friend, fall passionately into each other’s arms, and if I can call it
this, their love story pushes them more and more toward fleeing under the pretense of looking for
the missing woman. So, it’s a very sensual, violent love story, and Antonioni comments: [Pause]
since people no longer believe in this “you must”, why do we honor its moral standard? “The
conclusion the characters reach isn’t one of moral anarchy; what they arrive at is more of a
mutual sense pity, along the lines of ‘I understand you,’ ‘I understand you.’ That’s old, too!” In
other words, notice literally how the second sense of the word, old, also emerges from the nonchronological depths of time. This, too, is old; the Ancient Greeks constantly referred to a mutual
sense of pity. This mutual pity is even more effective than moral anarchy at matchmaking.
[Laughter]

Then how do we explain it when love pulls through? If, as they say—everyone has their own
problem—if you consider, those of you familiar with Kierkegaard, if you consider the problem
Kierkegaard obsessed over, it’s of this sort, but he taken the problem and used it to frame the
totality of the world. Antonioni, that’s what I like so much about him, his way of pursuing a
problem, and we’re all like this—but there are some, some of us have a gift for it—obsessing
over a problem such that it reframes the world in its totality, i.e., the state of society, industry,
everything, the worker, the peasant… His obsession is: What on earth are these lovers doing? It
shouldn’t be that way, he says. We’ve become accustomed to it, so we think, okay, it’s no big
deal. What’s he talking about? No way—he won’t let it go!

It’s like Kierkegaard with Job, I won’t let it go! I want an answer from God himself! I won’t let
up. Philosophers are like assholes, because philosophers won’t settle for generalities; I,
Kierkegaard, won’t give up on God, just like Job said: I, Job, won’t give up on God, I need to get
an answer from God himself. I won’t settle for generalities like, oh, well, that’s life… [Laughter]
“Love doesn’t always last.” No, no, no, I won’t let God off the hook without getting a straight
answer: why does love—which ought to be something important—only wear us down, or at best,
at best, make us pathetic, making us pity each other. That’s what he’s after.

                                                                                                 18

Personally, that doesn’t strike me as all that urgent, but neither are mine: I stress the idiotic
nature of problems, in this sense: the philosopher is really someone who refuses to let go of a
stupid problem. Kierkegaard has written some beautiful pages on Job, on the story of Job, and
that’s what’s going on there. Job suffers all these hardships and all his buddies come by and tell
him, “Oh, Job, everyone is mortal, God punishing you is proof that He loves you,” and then Job
says, “No”, in the muck, in his despair, “No, I won’t let it go. I won’t let God off the hook,”
which means, “I need to hear it for myself.” Or, as [Lev] Shestov, an admirable thinker, puts it,
“I want an explanation for every victim in the story, I don’t want a Hegelian sort of response—
‘Of course! History is an unforgiving process whereby reason is actualized.’ I want an
explanation for each senseless death.” You think, he must have gotten a lot of answers, but he
will have posed the question for two hundred pages—no—over a thousand pages, and wonderful
pages at that, I mean, not simply aesthetically beautiful—this is incredible work, offering so
many reasons to live. Well, it’s the same sort of thing with Antonioni and his problem.

And he says, okay, the most they’ve achieved is a sort of mutual sense of pity; we might call that
old, too. Indeed, it’s tragedy; it goes back as far as Aeschylus, the mutual sense of pity which
mortals… “But what else is left if we do not at least succeed in achieving [this sense of pity]?”
Antonioni says, “Why do you think eroticism is so prevalent today in our literature, our theatrical
shows? It is a symptom”—hey, he’s sounding more and more like Nietzsche—It is one of the
easiest symptoms to understand, “a symptom of the emotional sickness of our time. But this
preoccupation with the erotic would not”—and here we’re coming to the end of this wonderful
passage—“But this preoccupation with the erotic would not become obsessive if Eros were
healthy […] but Eros is sick.” Eros wouldn’t make us sick, i.e., erotic. Our “preoccupation with
the erotic would not become obsessive if Eros were healthy.” [Laughter] Isn’t that great? Eros
would not make us sick “if Eros were healthy.”20

Evidently it isn’t our fault, eh? If it were healthy, it would be fit for our human capacity and we
would be able to renounce it, that is, if I may add, if we were reconciled with time, and we have
not been reconciled with time. “In L’Avven…” “In L’Avventura,” “In L’AvvenTURA”— is that
where you put the accent, L’AvvenTURA — no, you don’t put it there? Where does it go?
[Student: At the end?] At the end? [Another Student: The penultimate?] Oh, the penultimate, the
next-to-last… let’s just say The Adventure… [Student: That can’t be right.] [Laughter]

“The tragedy in The Adventure stems directly from an erotic impulse of this type,” i.e., when the
missing woman’s fiancé and friend start to develop erotic feelings for each other, the major scene
for Antonioni. “The tragedy [stems from] an erotic impulse of this type”—What I’m calling a
little trick, a trick for getting around the “you must,” is along these same lines—“unhappy,
miserable, futile.” Their erotic impulse is messy, they know it, they’re perfectly aware—they
know it’s worthless, that it’s an unhealthy Eros, and that what they’re getting into is unhealthy,
unhappy, miserable, futile. “To be critically aware of the vulgarity and the futility of such an
overwhelming erotic impulse, as is the case with the protagonist in The Adventure, is not
enough.” [Pause] “If we know that the ancient codes of morality are decrepit and no longer
tenable,” why do we still heed them? “There’s a stubbornness I find sadly moving.” And as he
wraps up, he asks why we only respond with such pathetic little gambits, thinking, well, I no

                                                                                                   19

longer believe in this “you must,” only to swap it out for some “unhappy, miserable, futile”
erotic impulse, which makes us so unhappy that it makes us need therapy. [Laughter]

And Antonioni goes on: “Thus moral man who has no fear of the scientific unknown is today
afraid of the moral unknown.” That’s the crux of the matter: “Thus moral man who has no fear
of the scientific unknown is today afraid of the moral unknown.” In other words, to summarize
my takeaway from Antonioni: behind truth’s crisis—no, I’m summing up what comes before my
third point—behind truth’s crisis is its fundamental relationship to time, that is, to the form of
time, or that which expresses time’s foundation or non-chronological substance. What I’m
calling the form of the time isn’t chronology, it’s what expresses time’s foundation or its nonchronological substance. What is that, tentatively? We can’t know yet, since it’s part of the work
ahead of us. So, what makes truth fundamentally linked to… no, what brings truth into crisis is
its fundamental relationship to time.

Our fourth point: what’s behind the fundamental link between truth and time isn’t scientific
knowledge, [Pause] it’s morality and the moral realm of feeling, “moral” here meaning almost
like, like the equivalent of sentimental— for me, moral refers to the realm of feeling or
sentiment. See how things are progressing; we keep moving along. Isn’t that something? This
isn’t too fast, is it?

So, my third point was, I think, yeah… I’ll repeat it because I, myself, am not too clear on it.
What causes truth… no, what provokes truth’s crisis is its relationship with time, such as we’ve
just described it in an already complicated way; and fourth, what links time and truth together is
morality, as we’ve just explained. That is, as the realm of feelings, of the purely formal “you
must,” of sickly Eros, of little tricks for getting out of, getting away from this sickly Eros.

With that, I’m almost done with what I wanted to cover before I turn things over to you. No, I’ve
almost… all I’m saying, before we move on, all I’m saying is that we’re going to see this last
point, i.e., that what makes truth—yes, I keep on repeating myself, because to me, of course, this
is right, my gut tells me that I’m on the right track, so I repeat it again and again—what links
truth and time—I mean, it has to ring true before we can understand it. When you think, yeah,
I’m on the right track. Well, but that’s not so reassuring—So, I’ll repeat: the fundamental link
between truth and time—ah, I forgot—it isn’t a matter of scientific knowledge; it’s about
morality, it belongs to the realm of feelings or sentiment. Now you’re thinking, go over that
again in your head. The more you repeat it, the more you think it isn’t so great, and in another
way, the more you repeat it, the more you think, God, we’re not quite there yet. [But] if we
manage to pin down what’s going on here, we’ve got something.

Because ultimately, what I’m focusing on is how Nietzsche tell us—this concludes our last
point—Nietzsche tells us time and time again, especially in The Gay Science: I am the first
thinker to have brought the subject of truth into question.21 No one has ever understood what it
meant to question truth. Moreover, I’ll say that the powers of the false are infinitely more
interesting than truth. I’m heralding a crisis of truth, for the sake of the powers of the false I’m
going to reveal. Only the powers of the false are interesting. That’s what he says, explicitly. I’m
the first to have brought the subject of truth into question. Secondly, he says: the problem of
truth and its crisis does not come about in the name of an impoverished and flat scientific

                                                                                                  20

knowledge. If you believe that—and it’s precisely because we believed that that no one has ever
questioned truth or realized the crisis it was in. [Pause]

The fourth passage. [Pause] So, that’s the second passage we find in The Gay Science. With the
third passage22 if calling truth into question is strictly related to the realm of feelings or
sentiments, it’s simply because the notion of truth and the form of truth itself has a moral origin
and only a moral origin. [Pause] So that, in questioning the subject of truth, or undermining it,
what we’re interrogating isn’t about a variation in moral beliefs, which we’re profoundly
indifferent to, but the form of the whole moral standard everyone has hitherto respected: you
“must” do something, whatever that might be. [Pause] And this is where the concept of truth
comes from, and he goes to great lengths to prove it.

And the fourth is a great passage from The Gay Science23, where he exhorts all of us, strange as
it might sound—very difficult, it’s a difficult text, which is why it requires a closer look—
“Either abolish your venerations or yourselves!” Abolish your venerations. It’s a wonderful text,
and it begins with “man is a venerating animal, but he is also a mistrustful one.”24 And so on, and
so on, and perhaps that will be how it goes, a final product of nihilism: “Either abolish your
venerations or yourselves!” Wow, what a great passage—a wonderful line from Nietzsche. Why
do I bring it up now, before we’ve even begun to work through these texts? Because it
corresponds so well to what Antonioni says. Abolish your venerations or abolish yourselves.25

What’s more, he gives us the right way to understand this line: either abolish your venerations, or
you’ll be forced to abolish yourselves. How come? Because your venerations are what abolish
you, and they do so in two ways: because from birth they burden you with a form given in
advance, the ruinous form of a “you must,” which you can only fend off with pathetic little tricks
that do nothing but enhance your discomfort. If you don’t abolish your venerations, you abolish
yourself, either because you’ll be forced to honor your venerations, to obey them, or else—which
isn’t any better—you’ll be forced to escape them, but in a way even more useless, more
desperate. In either case, in either regard, these parts of Nietzsche work through this knot, this
conceptual knot between morality, truth, and time.

And if I had anything, there is one philosopher who I think was the greatest of the pre-Socratics.
The greatest of the pre-Socratics was the one who gave meaning to philosophy. It’s not—it’s not
cut and dry. But as I see it, it’s Empedocles. Everyone has their favorites, so I’ll tell you mine:
for me, it’s Empedocles. [Laughter] It’s Empedocles. I would have said… since we don’t have
the text, I might have said Heraclitus, or Parmenides, instead of Empedocles. Some of
Empedocles’ work has survived, but not all that much, really—so, that’s my choice. Yeah.
Because Empedocles did something outstanding. He—look, you’ll see why I’m bringing this
up—he did something—everyone knows, right, that philosophy isn’t… it means “friend of
wisdom,” you know? Heidegger had a big part to play in the shift, and he tried to explain what
“philos” means in Greek, because it wasn’t exactly the same as “friend.” Because I’m not much
of a Heideggerian, I’m not exactly on board with Heidegger’s commentary, on what he thinks
the real meaning of “philos” is.

I see it differently. Empedocles pulled off something incredible. He made it so that the problem
depends—up to then, there was an interest in the difference between true and false, even before

                                                                                                   21

Empedocles. And generally speaking, it was a question of wisdom, of “sophia.” Even then, the
problem of what’s true and false was a question of “sophia.” Empedocles is the first one to have
said—we’ll see why later on; we’ll talk more about Empedocles next time—Empedocles is the
first one to have said: no, there’s something else behind true-and-false. [Interruption of the
recording] [1:55:21]

Part 3

… Behind true and false, there is love and hate. Personally, when I say that, it sounds so novel,
it’s flips everything around. I won’t say that I really buy it, that it’s love and so on. It’s a
complete revolution. It’s huge. We talk about what’s true, about “alatheia,” but behind that,
there is love and hate, and the conflict between them. It wasn’t like that with Heraclitus—there
was conflict, but it wasn’t like that, it wasn’t a struggle between love and hate. In other words,
[Empedocles] reveals love and hate to be behind true and false. From then on, from there on the
“sophos,” the sage, becomes “philo-sophos.” The act of philosophy is that of discovering that the
question of love and hate lies at the very heart of the question of truth. Nietzsche is a philosopher
insofar as he always reminds us that the question of love and hate lies at the heart of the question
of truth, to the point that those who say, “I want the truth,” are fundamentally hateful. It’s a
peculiar turn of events. Empedocles was the first to carry out this reversal. And we’ll see why he
did it; he did it in a very, very precise way. What Empedocles did was incredible. He’s truly one
of the greats.

Anyway, for the time being, as we transition from Antonioni into Nietzsche, and what I still have
left—then I absolutely have to go to the office, unfortunately—what I still have left is, first,
reaching where I’d like to intervene with these four points, four very particular points, and we’ll
more or less stick to that for today, and I’d like to divvy up our research topics since now you
might see and understand how the topics I outlined at the very beginning, in our first meeting,
are starting to become relevant. And I’d like to hear from anyone who’s ready to pitch in. And
anyone who isn’t ready to participate, as cruel and hateful as you are, you’re obviously free to
go. I’ll be back in 15 minutes, then I’d like for us to have a conversation about these four points
and how to organize the work ahead of us.

Next time, then—that will let me clarify anything that’s still unclear when we end class today—
I’ll start by commenting on the four passages we’re pulling from Nietzsche’s The Gay Science.
So, it’s important that you all read as much of The Gay Science as you can. Fortunately, some of
the paragraphs stay the same, no matter what translation. With The Gay Science, I’m particularly
interested in 344… paragraphs 344, 345, and 346, three main—three—three main passages, two
pages each, they aren’t long, six pages total, but [these are] three major passages from Nietzsche,
after paragraph 319, from The Gay Science. I’ll get into it later.

A woman student: And you’re coming back?

Deleuze: Yeah, yeah, of course. [Interruption of the recording] [1:59:00]

… But in this sometimes, these things don’t always work out together. Sometimes you may well
be quite happy with me while I’m not, but at the moment, I’m quite pleased! Because…

                                                                                                 22

The student: Happy with us or with you?

Deleuze: With you—oh, I’m always happy with you, always, across the board. Because, only
because I managed, in my mind—which doesn’t necessarily mean it’s clear for anyone else—
managed to clarify what I’ve been trying to say from the beginning, and then we won’t talk about
it anymore. Anyway, I have these four levels. But I’m sorry to say that this won’t last; we’ll start
all over, because we’ll get six other levels when we start talking about the relationships between
these four. And finally, we’ll finish our introduction. That’ll be around Easter. [Laughter]

So, there you go. Personally, what I need are two things. [First,] your reactions. I’m only talking
about the four levels, if only to see if there’s anything I absolutely do not understand, so I can
make it our task to… anyway, on the one hand, [I need] your reactions, and on the other hand,
we’ll come back to our research topics that I described at the very beginning in our first meeting,
and see if I can count on some of you to handle one topic or another—not handle, but look into—
and see if you can package your thoughts in the form of either an in-class intervention or, quite
honestly—whatever works, I’m not against it—you could honestly put it in writing and send it
my way, and I can relay it for you—but anyway, what I’m saying is that you’re time has come.

So, first off, do you all have anything important to add—though I guess it’s unclear… on that
note, I understand if some of you find this completely unpalatable; [if it] doesn’t speak to you at
all, well, there’s an easy solution: you should find a different class. I mean, I can’t pretend to
please everyone, and I say that with total modesty. But if you are generally on board, anything to
contribute, straightaway? Something like, for example: in the discussion ahead of us, some point
or other, in particular, that we’ll need to expand on. So, that’s the first type of question or
response I hope to get out of you. And then there’s another type of question. We’ll start with the
first. What do you have to contribute? Is there anything we need to… I’m not saying we’re
through with…

Georges Comtesse: [Inaudible comments at the start] … I’d like to ask a question regarding the
question of the problem of time in Antonioni, and even Antonioni’s trilogy after The Cry, that is,
The Adventure, The Night, and The Eclipse. Because, when Antonioni approaches, for example,
from a limit, from a limit of philosophical thought, that is, Kant’s thought with the idea of time
having a caesura and of time as an empty form, the difference between long and short time.
When you approach this question, I think, of course, that’s certainly related to what Antonioni
sometimes says in his writing. But is that totally compatible with what’s captured in the space of
his films, exactly? That’s my question. I’ll explain. When Antonioni talks about time, we said it
was a raw signal of time, the same as we said about Resnais. Telling you he actually believes…
[Laughter, noise in the room]

Deleuze: Already, you aren’t giving me an inch… [Laughter, commotion]

Comtesse: …What he’s doing is his way of not getting pinned down, not being saddled with the
label like Resnais. Because if we’re sticking to a philosophy of cinema, you might even say that
it’s not so much a non-chronological core [fond] as it is the empty form of time. When it comes
to the space of film, it’s more—it’s a lot more complicated than that because the point, after

                                                                                                   23

Antonioni’s The Cry—at first at least— [what he’s trying to capture] isn’t a non-chronological
substance overflowing the empty form of time. What he’s trying to capture is what might be
called the force of time. And the force of time, as the force of solitude, perhaps—there are
several things going on here, but primarily it’s the force of the void, or more precisely, the force
of empty time.

And why? Well, because in the film you discussed, it’s that force, capturing a particular block,
which effectively suspends the domain of feelings [sentiments] and sends love into a
fundamental crisis, since this block, which is the force of time, the force of empty time—empty
time is a moment above or below, whether it’s chronological time or Aeonic time—this force of
empty time is the force of a certain, you could call it a certain block, for Antonioni, it’s a block
of distance, of neutralization, extension, disappearance, the woman’s disappearance, she doesn’t
have to really disappear. This block, the man’s block, implies the woman’s disappearance. It’s
just as much a block of anesthetized indifference, whence the little erotic impulses you spoke of
can emerge—it doesn’t matter, that would still fall under this block of anesthetized indifference,
an eclipse, the eclipse of desire. That is, this dominant block of desire is the block eclipsing a
determinant desire, for which time is a void. And that’s precisely what’s at issue concerning
Antonioni and the mutation that he undergoes through his trilogy, specifically when he talks
about space, or about the melancholic machine in Red Desert, a devouring machine, he calls it.

And this devouring machine, for example, in Red Desert, before we go through this machine, he
ends up saying or seeing, in a certain regard, that it’s an envelope. So, there is a whole mutation
in Antonioni, it’s rather an exploration, let’s say, an exploration, carrying out the events of
desire, based on or by way of the block of empty time, which is the empty force of time, and
which is precisely the block of incommunicability, incommunicability as a kind of state: you say
nothing, there’s no communication between… Meaning there is something, an eclipse, which is
the block of the desire, which is never communicated between, and which imposes, and which
imposes the realm of feelings, but which turns love precisely into non-understood time. Thus, the
question—which is a slight, minor difference—is that instead of talking about the relationship
between the empty form of time and the core—oh, no… the substantial core of time—perhaps
we instead ought to come up what it is, exactly, that filmmakers have captured in their film’s
cinematic space, that is, in the block of an empty force, an empty force of solitude, a force of
empty time.

Deleuze: Listen, Comtesse, I’m struck, because it’s a text that I’ve reread pretty recently after I
went to see a film by Mankiewicz. I always get the feeling in our conversations that I’m Brutus,
and you’re Marc-Antony. [Laughter] Because, everything you said—granted, you said more than
me, you said more than I did about Antonioni, but then again, my goal wasn’t to examine
Antonioni’s films in general. Above all, I wanted to examine two texts that I found lovely, from
my own point of view, and not in terms of Antonioni’s films per se.

And that being the case, I think you could say that what you’ve said totally lines up with me or
that I totally line up with what you’ve said. The only difference—I’m not saying that it isn’t
significant—is that your word choice is better than mine. I wasn’t satisfied with mine since, sure
enough, I was talking about the empty form of time, which you so ruthlessly pointed out, and it
bothered me while I was talking about it—though I wanted to reserve the word, “form,” for the

                                                                                                    24

“form of the true,” since that was the subject at hand—[it bothered me] to the point that I
clarified that the “form of time” only meant the expression of time’s a-chronological substance,
of time’s non-chronological foundation [fond]. So, it isn’t the only takeaway, but that’s my main
takeaway from what you’ve said, right, if you want to avoid any equivocation, it would have
been much better to call it the force of time. I think you’re absolutely right—though I think it’s
only a matter of wording, and yours is better. “Form of time” won’t work if we’re trying to
indicate what it is that expresses this non-chronological foundation since, indeed, it harks back to
Kant, who was referring to time’s non-chronological foundation itself.

Thus, it’s a thousand times better—if we want to describe what it is that expresses time’s nonchronological foundation, it’s a thousand times better to call it the “force of time,” especially
since that ties it directly to the power of this base or this foundation. And I could then argue that
this power and the force of time are the same thing. So, on this point, I’m fully on board, that is,
if it’s alright with you, I’ll adopt your terminology, and I’ll only talk about it in terms of the
force of time in direct comparison with the power of the false. Alright, then.

As for the rest of what you said: in my opinion, it all squares with what I was getting at, i.e., we
agree on what’s at stake in the force of time. Through the concept of truth, it is indeed a problem
with us, sick of Eros, because Eros is sick of himself. Then, on that point, you brought up issues
particular to Antonioni’s films, after The Cry, and so on—I can go ahead and sign off on what
you’ve said. But it really is a lot better to put it in terms of time’s force, a force of time—
nevertheless, is it necessarily empty? At any rate, a force of time regarding the power of the
false… I’m more than okay with that. Yeah. So, that makes things… as I said, I clarified things
as well as I could. No, there was one more step; we shouldn’t describe it in terms of the form of
time because then you can no longer tell between the form of time or the form of the true—you
risk confusing them—whereas the ambiguity disappears once we adopt Comtesse’s proposed
terminology. So, personally, I’m totally on board with his position. Yes, perfect. Are there any
other comments? Any other comments?

A student: [Inaudible comments at the start] … Could you elaborate on Kant’s antinomies?

Deleuze: On Kant’s antinomies?

The student: Yes. To know whether you could fit them into a previous narrative.

Deleuze: Whether …?

The student: … If you would place them in a previous narrative. [Pause]

Deleuze: I will have the chance to dip into Kant later on, but not on this aspect, I think. I’d be
curious to hear—I don’t really see why you’re linking these two problems. I can’t see the
connection. I’m curious—if you have the time and patience—next time, for next time, make a
short note for me—just something jotted down, you know, I’m not asking for a dissertation—
explaining the link you see between the subject of narration and Kant’s antinomies. It’s true that
the antinomies are two ways of describing, of narrating the world—that does sound right to me,
so I’m sure you have something in mind. So, if you’ll write a little something along those lines, I

                                                                                                   25

could answer you more directly; I could either tell you that no, I don’t see the connection you’ve
drawn, or I could give you a more specific answer.

C. Finkelstajin:26 I’d like to…

Deleuze: Yes?

Finkelstajin: Just now, ultimately, several times you repeated that truth was in crisis confronted
with time, but its problem was posed in terms of morality and not in terms of knowledge.

Deleuze: Yes, exactly! Our four points—I’m happy to go over them again; I’d go over them
again because I haven’t quite pinned them down in my head. But that’s exactly right…

Finkelstajin: I happened upon something written by physicists, biologists—scientists, let’s say
[Pause]—who in a way have pushed the principles we discussed last time vis à vis Leibniz a bit
further, in their attempt to define what physicists call the principle of entropy. The principle of
entros, the end of humanity. In Classical philosophy, objects were always thought of as existing
outside us—well, what you talked about last time, to define truth…—that objects exist outside
the perception we have of them. In fact, and what they try to prove—what these scientists
attempt to establish—is that the world only exists… when it comes to the biological possibility
of human existence, [the world] only exists insofar as there is an observer to see it. Meaning that,
because we can observe the world, that’s proof enough that it exists, and proof enough that there
is only one possible world, I mean, when it comes to the hydrogen, water, and air temperature
[that we need to live]. And I find that—how to put this—when it comes to scientists today, I find
that position rather interesting, that is, they might be in the midst of rendering questions of
morality and knowledge indiscernible, in a way that I’d argue is rather Spinozist, and I don’t
know, I wanted to know…

Deleuze: Yes, but that—yes, but that, I think, thanks to you, that will be one of our goals.
Because, if it’s alright with you, if you could send me a copy of that piece, hang onto it—we’ll
both look back over it to see what we can draw from it. Because indeed, I think we’ll explore
what you said a bit more next time when we talk about Nietzsche, where he says, “the true, the
true adventure doesn’t take place in science, it takes place in morality.” What does he mean?

Finkelstajin: Yes, of course, it’s effectively an ethical problem…

Deleuze: There is an ethical problem; for him, it’s a matter of lived experience. Ultimately, it’s
about lived experience; what’s important isn’t so much ethics as it is that there is a domain of
feeling or sentiment. Whereby certain instances of scientific problems can be precisely
articulated in terms of feelings or sentiments, where what’s at play is really… we’ll have to see.
We’ll have to work it out with this text, which I haven’t heard of. So, we’ll need to discuss it, if
that works for you. [Interruption of the recording] [2:17:48]

… highly expected, we immediately want to say, straight away, well, and Galileo?, that certainly
Nietzsche means something else. And that, when he says that the real crisis of truth takes place
not at the level of science but at the level of feelings, or morality, he obviously doesn’t rule out

                                                                                                   26

the fact that what he’s calling feelings, morality, might apply to science. Thus, what he’s saying
might be a lot more complicated than it seems.

If your first thought is “What does he mean?” I can’t help you; you’ll have to read the text, you’ll
have to go look, but that’s what I can recall. Afterwards you can present it yourself, as the first
objection to come to mind, and why science… involves something you could call the crisis of
truth. But I do believe we’ll uncover what Nietzsche means, if you have any doubts. It doesn’t
take place in science. So, in a way, it might be that there are no pure sciences, that, when it takes
place in science, it’s by way of an experience, a whole other sort of experiment. What he’s
signaling is that, in the end—but it’s a very difficult concept in Nietzsche—what he’s gesturing
towards is life. What I mean is that it isn’t about science; it’s about life. While there is life in
science, life, the way Nietzsche understands life, is so… Well, anyway. I’ll save that for later;
I’ll have to hold back…. Anything else?

A student: Yes, I had another question about Leibniz. It seemed to me, well, I think I agree with
you for the most part, but going back to what you said, when you said that selecting the best of
all possible worlds involves a moral decision—wouldn’t there be ontological repercussions?

Deleuze: That’s why I said the choice was moral, mathematical—I could have also added
theological, or what have you. It’s still the case that God chooses the best—the best in every
sense of the word—as a law, as a rule. And since—Leibniz having worn so many hats—since
Leibniz is a lawyer, it’s also lawfully, legally the best; the judge is making the right decision.
He’s a mathematician. [So] it’s the optimum, the law of maximums. But he’s [also] an ethicist, a
moralist…

The student: Then it absolutely isn’t something Spinoza is worried about?

Deleuze: Well, it absolutely isn’t a problem for Spinoza, by definition. At that time, there was
another philosopher who shared this problem, and they articulated it in almost the same way,
apart from one crucial difference: Malebranche. Malebranche also talks about possible worlds,
but he doesn’t develop a concept of incompossibility; a comparison to Malebranche is rather
intriguing, but I maintain that for Leibniz, the false, uh… the true can only be salvaged by
invoking, if you will, the [concept of] “right” [juste], in every sense of the word. Both in the
sense of… the mathematician’s calculations were “correct,” and in the sense of a judge or
moralist being “right” or “just.”

Another student: I’m not really sure what to ask, but I have an inkling, an intuition: I’m
suspicious, you know? You’re talking about morality, but what I’m really interested in is when
you talk about time in Resnais and especially in Orson Welles—whom I really enjoy—and you
mention time. And I think that time slides further towards aesthetics. Right away, Leibniz comes
up, and Leibniz was an aesthetician. It’s not really about ethics, it’s not really about truth, it’s
aesthetics. And then the two or three filmmakers you brought up, and that’s how it was, right?
All three are purely aesthetic filmmakers… incredible things…

Deleuze: Let me tell you, because your intervention is already great, and it specifically allows
me to… You’ve understood that, when either Antonioni or Nietzsche talk about morality, what

                                                                                                      27

interests them isn’t morality—not at all. What they’re interested in is what they call, and for
them it’s synonymous, the world of feelings. And, simply put, to use the word “morality” again,
because morality for them is defined by or as a certain regulation, the regulation of law and not
of form. But what they’re interested in is the world of feeling. They don’t say that the crisis of
truth takes place in morality rather than in knowledge; what they’re saying is that the crisis of
truth takes place in the world of feeling, in the world of feeling, which is something very new,
tantamount to saying: the crisis of truth isn’t situated in the world of representation but in the
world of feeling. But they’re forced to invoke morality, since morality is the normativity of
feeling, or the regulation of feeling. You follow? And thus, they certainly do participate in what
you’ve just described—at bottom, it has to do with aesthetics, aesthetics as in feeling or
sentiment. It encompasses a lot more than morality.

The student: Aesthetics is about… affects, not exactly feeling, but in the end my impression is
that it’s close to feeling…

Deleuze: Aesthetics is still a matter of feeling. So, on that point, completely agree.

Georges Comtesse: On the “you must,” in particular…

Deleuze: Yes?

Comtesse: Bringing it back to the realm of philosophy, it’s Kant, who, when it comes to the a
priori sense [sentiment] for the moral law, that is, respect for the decree, “you must,” the
categorical imperative to universalize he despises of action. Well, we also know that the
categorical imperative of the “you must” implies, as Kant says, an “infinite reduction,” in his
own turn of phrase, of perverse sensibility [sensibilité], of perverse desires, in other words.

Then, the question that I might ask, regarding the question you’ve raised about the substance of
time, is: Is this substance of time—instead of approaching it or grasping it in terms of either the
Kantian “you must” or in terms of the very opposite of the Kantian “you must,” that is, as the
radical force of destruction of the other qua other, which is the [word unclear] and which in a
way harkens back to the law and thereby means rising back up to God—instead of bringing
things back, therefore, to the philosophical and classical, should we not perhaps approach it
through the lens of Fritz Lang’s great film, which was playing again the other night, M [1931]?
Because at the end of M, with the sequence with the courtroom, and I took note of its
development, in the courtroom scene “the murderer” utters these three words. The murderer’s
three words are: fire, voice, torture.

In other words, the murderer is overcome by an undecidable drive to kill these girls. This drive
brings the eye to its limit, i.e., the eye bulges [Translator—"Ex-orbite.” The wordplay is lost in
translation], it basically revolts; it is within this repetitive drive, the drive of an undecidable fire,
because if he fends it off, he’s crushed by guilt or overwhelmed by anxiety, at which point, as the
impulse takes over, what he calls “the voice” emerges, and the voice is none other than the “you
must,” i.e., “you must kill.” He tries to resist. He says, “I must, I must, I will not.” So, he’s
attempting to resist the most classic force, the will, and he is forced, then, to consummate or
satisfy his compulsion. Put another way, the torture that results from the struggle between the

                                                                                                  28

voice telling him, “you must,” and the will to resist this law, where he’s swept up by a
murderous compulsion—doesn’t this voice’s “you must” offer us a new way of approaching the
a-chronological substance of time?

Deleuze: New, I think—it’s very interesting, but new… there’s no reason to think that it would
be newer than anything else. See, because everything you just described, I think, applies to one
instance. It’s a very specific case, where what’s in question is the evildoer, and I’d like to frame
things from the perspective of the fraud or falsifier. Because our image always has something of
a falsifier in it, too. And personally, I could only approach that when I come back to… I think,
yeah, no, I don’t really think that would get us very far. The example you use, at any rate, given
its shape, its complicated constellation, I’m looking for the same things you are. I only see one
instance of this combination between the power of the false and what you cleverly named the
force of time. One instance—certainly not a privileged instance—you say it would somehow be
more novel; in my opinion, it’s no newer than anything else because, at the end of the day, it
goes back as far as Plato; it’s already there in Plato. Plato has some wonderful passages
concerning what he calls “the phenomenon of depravity according to nature,” which he opposes
to other types of depravity. What exactly is an evildoer? What complex, what constellation
corresponds to the naturally deprave? It comes up explicitly in Melville, and that’s why I’m so
insistent on discussing Melville.27 I believe that the principle you’re describing is incredibly
important, but I don’t think it’s particularly unique among the powers of the false or the forces of
time; or, at any rate, I can’t see a reason to privilege it over others. Yeah, it belongs to a long
list… but that it does belong on the list, we can agree on that much.

Anything else? Anything else? Anything? Nothing else? First, this is what I’d like. I gave you
series of research topics—very abruptly, now that I think about it, so you had no reason to
understand them. Now I reckon that you can understand how they’re connected. I no longer can
remember what was on the list. No one wrote it down, did they?

A woman student: He did…

Deleuze: Him? Ah always, always, always a bit of truth. Alright. I thought this first line of
inquiry would be particularly well-suited for anyone who’s done a bit of crystallography—or
physics, even. All I would ask of them, then, would be to have at it, just play around, play around
with the crystal philosophy, much like they did in the 19th century with the philosophy of nature.
So, I don’t want an outline of things about crystals, or what have you—what I want is for you to
use what you know and what you can figure out about crystallography to attempt, on your own,
to figure out the idea of a crystalline image, since not all images are crystalline. I’d be very
interested to see, then, you work through this kind of transplant. You’d take what you understand
about crystallography and figure it out, if necessary adjusting my initial definition of crystalline
images—as this sort of indiscernibility between real and imaginary, the real image and the
virtual image, the actual image and the virtual image—to see if that holds up, or what have you.

So, if some of you have a bit of training in physics, if you could look through a crystallography
textbook and help me out, that would be terrific. Straightaway, are there any? Anyone? [Pause]
Aha! You’re just the man we need. Well, then, come and see me, I don’t know when, but come
see me. You’ll get started on it, will you? I would really appreciate that. And reflect on whether,

                                                                                                  29

at any rate, we’ll need you to take notes and give them to me, and then we’ll talk over them a bit.
And then we’ll see how you do, if you can… if you’re willing to write up a report, if, but you’d
have to willing for us to develop it, right? Terrific. What is your name?

The student: Jouanny.

Deleuze: Jouanny? Have you been with us before?

Jouanny: No, this is my first year.

Deleuze: It’s your first year, so you don’t know—you don’t have our habits—with time, you’ll
get into the habit. [Laughter] So, all the more reason I need to see you. If you want, next
Tuesday we’ll set up an appointment before Christmas break. Terrific, crystallography.

Moving on to our second research topic. I would have liked for some of you to take the
opportunity to do an overall rereading of Melville, the novelist—Herman Melville, the American
novelist. Does anyone have a particular interest in Melville, someone already familiar with his
work, who feels up to providing an overview of his work in order to organize it, and even putting
it to paper?

A student: [Inaudible, but likely referring to the difficulty of obtaining Melville’s book]

Deleuze: [Laughing] The Confidence-Man is a problem. At a glance, none of the students here
are all that interested in English literature. I’m sure there’s one out there, but what was his name?
What?

The student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: But if you’re into Melville…

The student: But I haven’t read him! [Laughter]

Deleuze: This is your chance to read all of him; it’s now or never. But obviously, while I hope I
can make you want to read him, I can’t force you to jump straight into… Who here has read
Melville, anyway?

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Show yourselves! Well, they don’t want to. I’m sure there are plenty, but they aren’t
interested. For example, he’s read Melville… I can tell—there, the tall blond guy… I can tell,
call it intuition. Aha, see, he’s playing dumb. [Laughter]

The student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Ah… I wanted him to lie. I was hoping he’d lie, and he says, “I haven’t read Melville.”
“I’ve never read Melville,” he tells me. [Laughter]

                                                                                                    30

A woman student: Yes, you!

A student: [Unclear, but it sounds like he’s suggesting something else by Melville,“Bartleby.”]

Deleuze: Huh? Oh, apparently that’s his favorite; he already has a favorite. How is it?
“Bartleby,” evidently, yeah, “Bartleby” is so wonderful. It’s around 50—no—40 pages, so you
could call it a novella, you know? It’s a novella which I think—wasn’t it translated in “Benito
[Cereno]”?

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: No, no, I swear it isn’t. Well, “Bartleby,” would work in a pinch, yeah, we’ll need
“Bartleby” soon enough, anyway. I guess I’m not seeing many for Melville, then…

I’d like to set something straight, when it comes to cinema. A third research topic I’d like for you
to pursue—because it’s a pet peeve of mine, nothing major, but something that’s come up
between Comtesse and me for almost two years, where, no, if it’s not this, it’s something. I
claim, I maintain that Welles, Resnais, as well as Robbe-Grillet, fundamentally represent a
cinema of time; they invented the time-image, and Comtesse suggests that yes, many have said
as much, it’s clearly important, it’s an idea with a lot of traction, but interestingly, he suggests he
doesn’t see it that way at all, and he invokes—we got into this a bit two years ago, I think—he
invokes some of Robbe-Grillet’s formal writing. Since I’ve also brought up them up, and
because his writing covers a wide range, I'd like for some of you to dig into what’s going on with
time-images in Welles, in Resnais, or regarding the time-image, etc. That involves a whole
bunch of film. I’m not even asking for that since—while there are some—I don’t believe many
of you study cinematography. Otherwise, I would expect [you to watch it all], if it speaks to what
they remember or currently understand about this group of filmmakers.

The third subject—now you’re starting to see how they’re connected. This one is Nietzsche, a
close reading of The Gay Science, I’ve already pointed to four books: The Twilight of the Idols,
and obviously Zarathustra, especially the last part, since the last part includes a procession of socalled overmen, where the so-called overmen each represent a power of the false. This
particularly hypocritical and insidious parade of all the powers of the false, which will be
dominated, mastered, and transformed by Zarathustra into something different. Thus, it’s kind of
a stunning opera, a very modern opera where each comes in with a song, and all of them
appearing as powers of the false, for example, the whine of a crying infant, a young girl’s mask
for singing Ariadne’s plea, and behind, an old man’s head, and in all of it, there is a whole game
of the power of the false with the senses. Thus, I’d be really interested if some of you did a close
reading of Nietzsche.

For the more hardcore philosophers among you, I’m eagerly looking forward to a close reading
of Plato. And as I said last time, the sort of reading we need is one focused on Protagoras,
Gorgias, and Hippias, three of Plato’s dialogues named after Sophists. That’s precisely what I’m
interested in, the fact that they’re Sophists. Then two major Platonic dialogues, The Sophist and
The Statesman. Plus, [Eugene] Dupréel’s book, which I’ve just learned has been reissued, so it’s

                                                                                                                     31

easy to find—a book about the Sophists, where he tries to discern Protagoras’ position, and
Hippias, and Gorgias. So, that would be another research option.

Anyway, alright, I think… Ah! Finally, for anyone with some training in logic, I’d love it if you
take another crack at it—formal logic, modern logic—it would be great if you went back—and
here, you can see how everything is connected, that these different research topics are, in fact,
coherent—if you could dig down into an oft misunderstood part of logic, which I think is
fascinating: the theory of descriptions, which holds an important place in the history of modern
logic after [Bertrand] Russell, the theory of description—I don’t need to say why it’s
interesting—and pair that with contemporary narrative theory or theories, which are part of
literary criticism rather than logic. For example, Gerard Genette’s recent work on narrative or
stories. Add these both together, theories of narra… ideas about description-narration. That’s
what I’d be really interested in, especially in the context, again, of a system of knowledge,
formal logic—accounting for Russell and the extraordinary approaches to description we get
from English logicians. So, those are our all of our research topics, then—I’ve already met with
some of you; if there’s anyone else, come and see me. Come and see me.

A woman student: [A question about Genette’s work]

Deleuze: By Genette? Yes, there’s Figures III or II, I think… There are either two or three
Figures… [End of the session] [2:40:47]

Notes

  Given the span of these three months, Deleuze is likely referring to two articles: an article/interview by Serge
Daney in Liberation, October 3, 1983, p. 31, and an interview by Hervé Guibert, Le Monde, October 6, 1983, pp. 1,
17, both regarding the publication of Cinema 1: The Movement-Image. See also Two Regimes of Madness, trans.
Ames Hodges and Mike Taormina (Los Angeles: Semiotexte, 2006), pp. 210-221.
  Alain Robbe-Grillet, For a New Novel: Essays on Fiction, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Grove, 1965), pp.
147-148.
  On “reports” and disconnected space in Antonioni, see The Time-Image, pp. 6-9.
  Sentiment is tricky for a translation. In most cases, “feelings” works perfectly well for sentiments. In some cases,
however, “sentiment” has been left when it could also be taken to mean an impression or opinion (as in “I share your
sentiment”). In some instances, such as Antonioni’s interviews below, words like “sensibility” or “attitude” are used.
Antonioni says that, from birth, we are burdened by certain moral sentiments—“moral feelings” does not appear to
work as well as “moral attitudes” or “moral sensibilities.” For the sake of clarity, both of these options (“feeling” or
“sentiment”) are used on occasion.
  On disconnected space and any-spaces-whatever, see (e.g.) session 11 of the Cinema seminar I (March 2, 1982), as
well as sessions 6 and 11 of the Cinema seminar II (December 21, 1982 and February 22, 1983).
  On Fellini, see The Time-Image, p. 8.
  Deleuze’s neologism, instat, is also introduced in The Time-Image, p. 6.
  Deleuze brings up the term, procadence, in The Time-Image, p. 91.
  While le vrai et le faux literally means “true and false,” the reader should not confuse these terms for “correct and
incorrect.” In the context of these lectures, the reader might consider phrases in English such a real or true friend
versus a false or fake friend, a reliable or unreliable narrator, a real or forged signature, authentic or falsified
documents, etc.
   While “falsifier” is a perfectly good translation of faussaire, in English we tend to think of a falsifier as someone
who falsifies something (e.g., documents, testimony, etc.). A falsifier passing something fraudulent off as genuine.
In this context, a faussaire might themselves be phony: an imposter passing themselves off as genuine. In English, a

                                                                                                                   32

“fraud” could refer to someone who does either or both, so sometimes the couple “falsifier” and “fraud” are
employed the reader.
   Fond could be “foundation,” “base,” “basis,” “depths,” etc.; one of these will be used for translation depending on
the context.
   It’s actually the latter part of session 2, November 22, 1983.
   Diodorus’ so-called “master argument” was discussed in Session 3, November 29, 1983. Regarding what makes
this the “master” argument, Pierre-Maxime Schuhl’s interpretation appears in Le Dominateur et les possibles (Paris:
Vrin, 1960), pp. 8-10.
   Actually, Deleuze doesn’t mention another author in the previous session in this regard; however, he might be
referring to Michel Serres’s book, Leibniz’s System, which Deleuze cites elsewhere. However, he also claims that it
was Maurice Leblanc who provided “the key to this [temporal] passage”.
   For more on Deleuze’s reference here to Leblanc, see Session 8 of his seminar on Leibniz and the Baroque,
January 27, 1987.
   See Sessions 18 and 19 of Cinema seminar I, from May 11 and 18, 1982, as well as session 23 of Cinema seminar
II, from June 7, 1983.
   Deleuze attributes these comments to Antonioni, from a book by Pierre Leprohon, Michelangelo Antonioni (Paris:
Seghers, 1962), p. 103, which Deleuze cites in The Time-Image, p. 284, no. 40 (translation modified from the
Tomlinson and Galeta’ translation).
   Deleuze’s reference in this passage is Leprohon, pp. 104-106, as cited in The Time-Image, p. 6. See p. 281, no. 9.
   For more on Antonioni’s text as it appears in Leprohon, see Cinema 2, p. 6. See p. 281, no. 9.
   Text adjusted to accommodate wording of the quote as it appears in “A Talk with Michelangelo Antonioni on His
Work” from Film Culture, no. 24 (Spring 1962), pp. 45-61.
   Based on Deleuze’s later suggestion, he’s primarily thinking of §344.
   Probably §345.
   §346.
   This comes from the middle of §346, where Nietzsche writes, “For man is a venerating animal! But he is also a
mistrustful one.”
   At the end of §346 Nietzsche writes: “[a suspicion concerning ourselves] that could easily confront coming
generations with the terrible Either/Or: ‘Either abolish your venerations or – yourselves!’ The latter would be
nihilism; but would not the former also be – nihilism? That is our question mark.” From Friedrich Nietzsche, The
Gay Science, ed. Bernard Williams, trans. Josefine Nauckhoff and Adrian Del Caro (Cambridge: Cambridge, 2001).
   This interlocutor, according to translators and filmmakers Graeme Thomson and Silvia Maglioni (private
communication), is the same student, Yolande Finkelstein, who participated in Deleuze’s seminars in the 1970
(notably, in 1975-76). It appears that the spelling of her last name has changed in 1983, as well as use of the first
name Claude (rather than Yvonne).
   See Chapter 11 of Herman Melville’s Billy Budd.