1

Gilles Deleuze

Deleuze and Boulez at IRCAM, On Musical Time

Conference, 23 February 1978

Translation and transcription, Charles J. Stivale [cf. WebDeleuze for alternative transcript
and translation by Timothy Murphy]

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lYfhwRmyw9Y

[The text presented here for scholarly purposes corresponds to the recording of the public
session of the IRCAM event, and not to the text published, and deliberately revised by Deleuze
(we believe), in Two Regimes of Madness, ed. David Lapoujade, trans. Ames Hodges and Mike
Taormina (Paris: Minuit 2003; MIT/Semiotext(e), 2006), pp. 156-160, under the title "Making
Inaudible Forces Audible". We should also note that at this moment, Deleuze in the process of
developing the themes presented here for his collaboration with Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus,
notably pp. 262, 267, 298, 545 note 87, and especially, in the plateau on refrains, pp. 316-319]

[The IRCAM event was a five-day colloquium, the first four evenings in closed sessions and the
fifth as a public event, with the participation of Roland Barthes, Gerald Bennett, Lucian Berio,
Pierre Boulez (organizer), Michel Decoust, Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault, Jean-Claude
Risset, and several members of the IRCAM team. The recording opens with several panels
explaining the purpose of the seminar, concluding: One of the questions raised by Boulez at the
end of his analyses seems to be the following: is it possible to speak no longer about music but to
speak starting from music? … Is it possible to grasp music not as an object but as a force
(capable of generating its own movement)? Or, which might be entirely the same thing, what is
Deleuze as non-musician doing here at a conference on music?]

Deleuze: Yes, the question is, why are we non-musicians here?

About this question, I’d like to make an opening comment about the method used, which is that
Pierre Boulez selected five works, five musical works: the relations between these works clearly
have no relation of filiation or dependence. Moreover, there is no progression or evolution from
one work to the next one. It’s rather as if the five works, let’s say – selected partially in
haphazard fashion, but only partially – created a cycle, and that in this cycle, they entered into
reactions in relation to each other. In other words, in this cycle an aggregate of virtual relations is
constructed between these works, and in these conditions, a special profile of musical time could
emerge, a special profile of musical time valid only for these five works. We might well imagine
that Pierre Boulez would choose four or five other works -- I’m saying that at random, in my
language – by Bartok, a work by Bartok, one by Stravinsky, one by Varèse, one by Berio. We
would then have another cycle, reactions from one work to another, virtual relations. From this

                                                                                                       2

cycle, another profile of musical time, equally special, could be discerned, or a special profile of
another variable that that of time.

So, I am saying that what seems quite interesting to me and for us in this method is that it’s not at
all a method of generalization. It does not concern starting with works selected as examples and
raising them toward an abstract concept of time about which we might say, “there, that’s musical
time”. It concerns starting with limited cycles, determined in certain conditions, and extracting
special profiles of time, allowing on this basis for superimposing these profiles and creating a
veritable cartography of variables.

And perhaps this method addresses music and a thousand other things. In the precise case of the
cycle chosen by Boulez, it seemed that the special profile of time did not at all attempt to cover
entirely the question of musical time in general; the special profile that we discerned was a rather
strange thing: based on a pulsed time, how a kind of non-pulsed time emerged, with this nonpulsed time quite able to return into a new form of pulsation. In fact, work number 1 (Ligeti)
[Concerto de chambre by György Ligeti] showed how a non-pulsed time arose through a certain
pulsation. Works II, III, and IV Les oeuvres II, III et IV [Dialogue du vent et de la mer by
Claude Debussy, Modes de valeur et d’intensité by Olivier Messiaen, Éclat by Pierre Boulez]
developed or showed different aspects of this supposed non-pulsed time. The final work V (by
Carter) [A Mirror on which to dwell, Elliott Carter] showed how, starting from a non-pulsed
time, we could rediscover a new form of pulsation, original, special, innovative.

So, the question would be to know, if we had sufficient time, what does this non-pulsed time
exactly consists of, this kind of floating time, which corresponds more or less to what Proust
called "a little time in the pure state"? The most obvious, the most immediate character is that a
so-called non-pulsed time is a duration, that is, it is a time freed from measure, whether the
measure is regular or irregular, whether simple or complex. So, it seems to me that a non-pulsed
time puts us first and foremost in the presence of a multiplicity of heterochronous, qualitative,
non-coincident, non-communicating durations. Henceforth, we clearly see the musical problem,
or something other than musical, namely, how will these heterochronous, heterogeneous,
multiple, non-coinciding durations be articulated? Since, as it would seem, we have deprived
ourselves of recourse to the most general, classic solution, which would consist in entrusting to
the Spirit the task of imposing a common measure or a metric cadence common to all these vital
times, since, from the start of the problem, musical or otherwise, this solution is blocked off, then
in which direction is one to go?

So, I don't know, even if it means going into another domain altogether, I think that, currently,
when biologists talk about vital rhythms, they encounter similar questions. They too reached the
conclusion that heterogeneous rhythms could be articulated by entering under the domination of
a kind of unifying form. And the articulations between vital rhythms, if necessary of the same
periods, for example, a 24-hour rhythm, they do not seek them at all on the side of a higher form
which would unify them, nor even on the side of a regular or irregular sequence of elementary
processes. They looked for them elsewhere. They look for them at a sub-vital, infra-vital level, in
what they call -- they have a very pretty name for that, let it be the first technical word, but
precisely it is not musical -- they call it a population of molecular oscillators that will somehow
go through, that will be able to go through very heterogeneous systems and very heterochronous

                                                                                                       3

rhythms like oscillating molecules, put into coupling, which then would go through systems and
completely heterogeneous durations. Notice that the setting into articulation here does not
depend on a unifying or unifying form, neither metric, nor cadence, nor any regular or irregular
measure, but on the action of certain couples, certain molecular couples, or even of a molecular
population released through different layers, different rhythmicities.

Let's assume that. It is not by metaphor that one can say, I believe, that one of the great
discoveries of relatively recent music was precisely the discovery, rather than of pure notes and
tones, that they substituted the notion of sound molecules, and of sound molecules in coupling,
capable of crossing layers of rhythmicity, layers of quite heterogeneous duration. Here then, it
seems to me, would be or what could be the first determination of a non-pulsed time.

[A voice comes from the audience, someone wanting to ask a question; the moderator, Pierre
Boulez says, “Not yet. I think it's better for Mr. Deleuze to make his presentation before..." The
person seems to insist on asking something quickly, and Boulez has to answer firmly, "Listen,
please, don't interrupt him, so let Mr. Deleuze finish his talk first”.]

The intervener: Why are you using such a complicate language which grasps nothing at all
about… [the words are lost in the noise of the other audience members asking him to be quiet]

Deleuze: I’m going to tell you… [Pause, applause from some audience members regarding the
attempt to silence the questioner, who continues speaking]

Boulez: So, go ahead and leave if you’ve not understood anything!

The intervener: [Inaudible comments]

Boulez: Listen, sir, I believe that we’ve now heard quite enough. That’s quite enough.

The intervener: [Inaudible comments]

Boulez: If it’s in order to state these kinds of banalities, really there’s no point in insisting on
continuing. [Applause, diverse reactions; pause]

A woman questioner: [Protesting the use of the term “banalities"; different additional
comments]

Deleuze: So, I believe... I am going to show that I have understood, completely understood what
he has just said because my second point is very, very, very, very simple, very simple. [Pause] I
believe it to be so, but I sense that I'm going to be interrupted [Deleuze points to several
audience members] because it's going to be too simple. [Laughter] I am saying, as a second
possible character of non-pulsed time, I think it would have a very close relationship with the
phenomena of individuation because phenomena of individuation themselves have very variable
relations with time. We all know one type of individuation, it's the most common, it's even the
one... it’s the regime of the one under which we live, which occurs at the same time by forms, by
specification of a form and assignment of a subject, namely me, another, someone; there is a

                                                                                                   4

form, and this form is assigned under conditions which produce individuations, which create
individuations. We also know that there are much more paradoxical individuations, I mean, of
another type, which do not correspond to the form-subject aggregate, which are much more the
types of individuations of a place, a landscape, a day, an hour of the day; if I say, “what an awful
7:05 p.m.” – here I am speaking concretely [Deleuze looks at his watch on the table] – “what an
awful 7:05 p.m.” A landscape, an hour, etc. There is a certain type of individuation here which
will not even be the combined play of a form and a subject. It is an individuation of the
landscape type, or of an event or a time, or almost a temperature.

I have the feeling that the problem of individuation in music, which is certainly very, very
complicated, is more of the type of these second paradoxical individuations than of the type of
the first. For example, what is called the individuation of a phrase, of a short phrase in music?
And in what sense does musical individuation in its linkage with time relate more to this second,
much more bizarre type than to the first type operating by form and subject? I would almost like,
starting from the lowest level, the most rudimentary or the easiest level in appearance, it happens
that music can remind us of a landscape; it happens that music can evoke a landscape. The
famous case is of Swann in In Search of Lost Time, hearing Vinteuil's little phrase, and it evokes
for him the Bois de Boulogne. It also happens that sounds evoke colors, either by association or
by phenomena known as synesthesia. It even happens that motifs in operas are linked to
characters, for example, a Wagnerian motif which is supposed to refer to a character. I don't
think we can say that this mode of listening to music, one might say that it is insufficient, but to
say that it is null or without interest, that would be unfair. Maybe even at a certain level, at a
certain level of relaxation, you have to go through that.

But why go through it? It’s because, at a more relaxed level, it is not the sound which refers to a
landscape, but it is the music itself which envelops a landscape distinctly of sound which is
interior to it. I think, for example, even with the ambiguity of levels, that in Liszt there is this
aspect, how sound can refer to an exterior landscape and, at the same time, how a soundscape
becomes interior to Liszt's music. The same could be said for the notion of color. We could
consider the sound-color relationship sometimes as a simple association, but also we can
consider that the durations, the rhythms, the timbres a fortiori, are in themselves colors, properly
sound colors which come to be superimposed on the visible colors and which do not have the
same speeds, nor the same passages as the visible colors.

One would say the same, it seems to me, of a third notion, the notion of character. One can
consider in opera certain motifs in association with a character, for example, as in a first hearing
of a Wagner opera. But Boulez has shown very well how the motifs in Wagner are not only
associated with an external character but are transformed into an autonomous life in a non-pulsed
floating time in which they themselves become, by themselves, characters interior to the music.
These three very different notions of soundscape, audible color, rhythmic character seem to me
precisely the products by which a non-pulsed time produces its individuations of a very, very
particular type.

So, I want to end with an even more general and very quick remark. It is that we are urged from
all sides no longer to think in terms of matter-form to the very extent that for the hierarchy which
would go from simple to complex, matter-life-spirit, we have ceased to believe in it in all

                                                                                                       5

domains. One can even think that life would instead be a simplification of matter. We might
think that the vital rhythms, as I alluded to earlier, do not find their unity or their unification in a
spiritual form, but on the contrary, in molecular couplings. So, all this matter-form hierarchy –
more or less rudimentary matter and more or less scholarly sound form – isn’t that what we have
finally stopped hearing and what composers stopped producing?

And what has taken its place? Perhaps instead, what happened was the idea of very elaborate
sound material. It is no longer a question of a rudimentary matter which would receive a form;
that is no longer the couple. The coupling is between a very elaborate sound material, and on the
other hand, forces which by themselves are not sound, not forms, but forces which by themselves
are not sound, and which become sound or audible through the material that makes them
appreciable. Here, I could indeed, to continue with something that was said earlier, I could think
for example of the section from Debussy which is titled “Dialogue du vent et de la mer”, in
which a highly elaborated sound material is seized as if by two forces. In example three, I
believe, which was the work from Messiaen in the cycle proposed by Boulez, the sound material
was also there to make audible a force which is not audible in itself, namely time, duration, and
even intensity which in itself is a sound phenomenon. Similarly, in Boulez's work, “Éclat”, all
the highly elaborated sound material with the extinction of sounds occurred to make perceptible
and audible two times, themselves non-sound, one defined as the time of the production in
general and the other as the time of meditation in general.

So, if you will, for the couple of relatively simple matter and sound form which would inform
this matter, it seems to me that more and more we have emphasized, we have substituted another
coupling between a material that is highly elaborated as a material and imperceptible forces
which become perceptible only through this material and which become appreciable only
through this material. And it is then in the sense that, at the limit, one could say the music is not
only, it is not only the concern of musicians insofar as music does not have sound as its exclusive
or fundamental element. Its element is the aggregate of non-sound forces that the sound material
elaborated by the composer will make perceptible in such a way that we can even perceive the
differences between these forces, all the differential play of these forces.

So, here, I tell myself, at the limit, what results is the real innovation in music, but it was already
true: all this work of very, very elaborate material in the service of non-sound forces, it
penetrated all of traditional music. There is no need to make a dividing line. It would rather be
appropriate to say that there was an immense upsurge at the end of the 19th century and the
beginning of the 20th century which did not necessarily pass through atonal music, nor through
serial music, which passes rather through all these creative endeavors to liberate chromatism, to
liberate oneself from temperament, and which yielded inventions in all directions both of the
molecular type, inventions also in making forces perceptible which by themselves are not
sonorous, within the elaboration of a complex sound material.

And I ask myself, finally, in a way, are we not all faced with somewhat similar tasks? I could
also say of philosophy, for example, that in a certain way, one could ask, what is classical
philosophy? It's... we give ourselves a kind of rudimentary matter of thought, like a flow of
thought, and then doing philosophy would be to inform this matter, that is, to establish thoughtforms, forms of thought, which philosophers call concepts or categories. But, from time

                                                                                                    6

immemorial, philosophers have also proceeded differently. That is, they sought to elaborate a
thought material, not a simple material, a very complex thought material in order to make
thinkable forces which are not thinkable by themselves. So, it's a bit like saying in music, there is
no absolute ear. The problem is to have an impossible ear, to make forces audible through a
complex material, forces which would not be audible in themselves. In philosophy, it is not a
question of an impossible ear, but of an impossible thought, that is, to make forces thinkable by a
very complex thought material, forces which would not be so otherwise. In that sense, I think we
have, we have so much to learn from music because it's very, very much ahead of us. [End of
recording]