1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Apparatuses of Capture and War Machines, 1979-1980

Lecture 12, 18 March 1980

Transcribed by Annabelle Dufourcq and Mariana Carrasco Berge

Translation by Charles J. Stivale

Part 1

Deleuze: … [As for] my categories … He wants a chair? … Pass him a chair.

A student: I am trying to find a chair ...

Deleuze: Isn't there an extra chair somewhere? Well no…

A student: Well, no? [Pause] But that's not normal.

Deleuze: Good. Yes, yes.1 We saw the last time, here, a first large heading -- you would almost
have to conceive them as insertable headings (rubriques à tiroirs), that is, you can add things,
you can, you could create others, perhaps, but at that point, you are intervening -- the first
heading which we looked at from the point of view of this parallel or this assimilation "politicsaxiomatic situation", this is like a global political problem really ... namely the situations of
"addition" or "withdrawal of axioms". And these two poles "addition-withdrawal of axioms"
allowed me to define a first bipolarity, a first bipolarity of the "State" form, of the "State" form in
the modern sense. And these two poles of the modern State were “totalitarian State-social
democratic State” depending on whether the tendency to restrict axioms manifested itself or, on
the contrary, the tendency always to add them did so, and this varied from place to place.2 So, in
that, I suppose that, unless there are some things… I almost dreamed earlier that you would
complete this with some concrete examples, so I was saying: the current case of Brazil seems to
me exemplary, in fact, because it exists as if in a suspended state. Are they going to choose a
kind of social democratic line with the addition of axioms? Are they going to maintain the
"reduction of axioms" totalitarian line? etc. Fine, sometimes it’s: one tendency asserts itself here,
but there, the other tendency asserts itself.

And this first State bipolarity, "totalitarian State-social-democratic State", seemed to me to
respond to the "internal market-external market" relation, the tendency to restrict the axioms in
which the totalitarian State fundamentally appears when it comes to organizing the collapse of
the internal market or asserting the exclusive primacy of the external sector. And the socialdemocratic tendency tends to assert itself to prevail when it comes to constituting an internal
market and placing it into relation with the external market. Fine, so, it is around the pole of…
no, of the “internal market-external market” relation, I believe, that we could account for the

                                                                                                       2

“totalitarian State-social-democratic State” alternations or, if you prefer, "addition of axiomssubtraction of axioms". There we are, so that’s what we’ve considered.

My second heading -- and that’s where I was the last time -- as in any axiomatic, it was the
problem of saturation because, however strongly, however precisely the two poles we’ve
considered previously present themselves to be – the tendency to add-the tendency to remove
axioms, in an axiomatic -- the problem that still remains is this: does a limit exist? Is there a
saturation of the axiomatic? Once again, saturation is when you cannot add axioms to an
axiomatic. A single axiom can no longer be added without the whole becoming contradictory. At
that point, we say the system is saturated.

Can we say that in the global system, more precisely in the capitalist global system, can we say
that there is saturation? If capitalism is an axiomatic, can we speak of saturation of this
axiomatic? Is the notion of saturation a concept which is not only mathematically valid when it
comes to studying axiomatics, but is it a comprehensive concept, that is, that makes us
understand something about the global political situation? And I was saying: our point of
departure, here, is this great text by Marx on the tendency of the rate of surplus value to fall,
because it is in this text that, to the maximum, it seems to me – although he does not use that
word -- Marx describes capitalism as an axiomatic, and on what basis? Namely, Marx’s entire
thesis is: capitalism indeed has limits, but these limits are extremely particular, extremely
singular. So, what are these limits?

And I was saying: Marx's text, well, it is organized, he organizes his analysis according to
several levels, and at the simplest level, it is the description of this tendential limit, namely Marx
tells us: capitalism is not developed without the two elements of capital changing their relation,
their proportion. Namely: the more capitalism develops as a system -- we tell ourselves: good, as
axiomatic -- the more the part of capital represented by constant capital, the more the "constant
capital" part of capital tends to prevail relatively over the other part of capital, “variable capital”.
Once again: in what way – and here, you must grasp this very well -- in what way is this a limit
of capitalism? It is because variable capital is the part of the capital invested in human labor.
Surplus value -- whether this is true or false doesn't matter, I am summarizing Marx's thesis --
surplus value extorted by capital depends on variable capital.

It is under its "variable capital" aspect that the extortion of surplus value by capital takes place.
Constant capital is the part of capital represented by raw materials and means of production. If it
is true that constant capital proportionally tends to outweigh variable capital, what does that
mean? Notice already -- which is an essential remark, otherwise… one cannot understand Marx's
thesis at all -- that does not prevent the "variable capital" part and the surplus value which
depends on it from absolutely increasing as capital grows, ... grows as capitalism develops. [For]
variable capital and surplus value, the more capital develops, the more it [the variable capital
part] absolutely increases. But what tends to decrease is the relative importance of variable
capital in relation to constant capital, that is: the more capital develops ... the more capitalism
develops, the more the share of constant capital tends to prevail over variable capital. So, “the
tendency of the rate of profit to fall”, what does this Marxist notion mean? It means, as the
"constant capital" part of capital prevails relatively, well, although the mass of surplus value
increases absolutely, it decreases relatively.

                                                                                                      3

So, there is a limit, in that sense; there is a very special limit of capitalism. In what sense, a very
special limit? We can see very well what Marx means then: a very special limit since surplus
value and variable capital increase in the absolute, with the development of capitalism, but at the
same time, represent in the total sum of capital a smaller and smaller part. This means that
capitalism is perpetually approaching a limit, and that limit recedes, does not stop receding, as it
comes closer. What is that? How to put this, it is ... it is a very curious status of the limit: hence
the expression "downward tendency". What would such a limit be? Such a limit is what we must
call: a transc ... er, limit, an "immanent" limit. It’s an immanent limit. And this is the entire
paradox of an immanent limit: an immanent limit is such that, in fact, as it is produced and is not
encountered from the outside by the system, it is internal: the more the system approaches this
limit, the more it pushes back this limit. This is like a very, very special, very singular status of
the limit. It seems abstract; we're going to try to make this very ... as concrete as possible.

A student: [Inaudible] ... internal structure, there is a moment of explosion or a moment of fusion
or ...

Deleuze: Yeah. But ultimately, it can be even more ... even more simply explained by a series, ...
by an arithmetic series. I mean: one, plus a half, plus a quarter, plus an eighth, etc., etc., which
has a limit and, at the same time, that limit is immanent, precisely in the sense that, the closer
you come to the limit, the further the limit recedes.

So what interests me is this: what is this notion of an immanent limit, that is, a limit that is not
encountered from the outside? Notice what problem this answers. In fact, all capitalism has the
strongest interest in persuading us that the limits it encounters are the limits of the world, that
these are the limits of resources, for example, natural resources, that they are extrinsic limits: this
is always the great theme of politics. What government never ceases saying and telling us: but
there is no other possible policy, really; in other words, the limits, they are external? Now we
begin getting suspicious: no, that is not right; the true nature of the limit in the political system
[is] that the limit is really generated by the system, as an immanent limit, that is, a limit which
moves away, which recedes, as one approaches it.

Henceforth, what is this immanent limit? Where does this kind of… immanent characteristic of
the limit come from? This is where Marx's second answer comes in, and this is the point I
reached when we stopped the last time. This is because Marx says: well yes, the immanent limit
translates a kind of contradiction at the very heart of capital; you see, analysis shifts a level here,
I would say, because [in] this contradiction, it is no longer a question of… simply a relation, of a
proportion, between the two constituent elements of capital: constant capital-variable capital.
This is quite another thing: it is a contradiction within capital in general.

What is this contradiction? In a very beautiful page, Marx states it very, very simply; he says:
well, at the same time ... at once, at the same time ... at the same time, it is capitalism which
invents the idea of producing in order to produce. Capitalist production is a production in order
to produce; it is a production that takes itself as an end, and why does this belong to capitalism?
There, our previous analyses almost prevent us from needing to repeat the letter of the ... Marx’s
pages because, if it is true that capitalism works with – in relation to previous or other formations
--, if it is true that capitalism works with literally decoded flows, it goes without saying that, at

                                                                                                    4

that point, capitalism releases flows of production for the sake of production. Decoded
production is "to produce in order to produce".

But let's accept that capitalism inaugurates economically, and with what that implies politically,
this reality of producing in order to produce. It remains nonetheless, and you see that here, this
is… I mean, this is almost things that… you can… that one must feel as much as understand: this
means that insofar as being capitalism, that it invents and that it unleashes a force of producing in
order to produce. In other words, is this so contradictory? But it is indeed at that point a
contradiction internal to capital itself; it is at the same time that it invents a product in order to
produce and that it is a product for capital. In other words, producing to produce is the correlate
of producing for capital, and yet producing for capital and producing in order to produce are a
living contradiction within the State. For if I produce for capital, that subjects production to very
restrictive conditions that ... which seem to be opposed to producing in order to produce. In fact,
maybe this is not in opposition, but there is at least an apparent contradiction in the double
movement, in the double movement of capital: producing in order to produce-producing for
capital. It remains abstract, all that. We'll… we'll see, right, but… what does that mean? In fact,
it means that to produce in order to produce is something that only works at the same time as I
produce for capital, since it is capital that unleashes the flow of producing in order to produce.

As a result, this is a very curious situation. So, since I will need it later, let's return to the
terminology to try to situate it, that ... that we needed about quite another thing, namely, about
the problem of war. But is it ... is it by chance that we need to return to that terminology right
now? I was saying: there is very interesting terminology in General Clausewitz's theory of war: it
is when he distinguishes between aim and objective (but et objectif), the aim of war and the
objective of war. And the distinction comes down to telling us exactly this: the aim of war and
the objective of war are not the same thing. The objective of war is what he calls, on his own,
absolute war; and the objective of war is defined in a very simple way, namely, the overthrow or
annihilation of the adversary: this is the objective of war as absolute war.3 The aim of war is
quite different: the aim of war is the political aim, it is the political end that a State proposes to
itself – some very diverse political ends: it can be for very different ends -- this is the political
end that a State proposes to itself when it makes war, that is, when it simultaneously proposes the
annihilation of an adversary.

And Clausewitz says: the political aim is fundamentally limited, namely it is such an aim that a
State proposes, whereas the objective is absolute. The objective is absolute, but it is still very
variable; why is that? Because the annihilation of the opponent varies depending on the
opponent’s determination itself. To annihilate the adversary, that means ... that changes
completely depending on whether the adversary is identified with the enemy army or with the
entire enemy population, or something else. You can have a type of war, for example, in which
the overthrow of the opponent is identified with destroying the enemy army. You can have a type
of war where the overthrow of the opponent is equated to "destroying the enemy population":
these will be two very different types of war. In other words, when I say, "war has a variable aim
and objective", well, the aim is always limited; the objective is more or less limited.

When can I speak of total war, which we found to be very different from absolute war, since
absolute war is simply the objective, specifically that in whatever way you want to understand

                                                                                                      5

the adversary, one proposes to overthrow the adversary, or to annihilate him, but total war is
different: it occurs when the objective becomes unlimited, namely when the adversary is
identified with the whole of the enemy population. At that point, the objective becomes
unlimited; in fact, it is a question of annihilation in the sense of radical destruction. So, the
question at the level of war is exactly this: when the objective of the war becomes unlimited, that
is, when the war becomes total, don’t the aim and the objective enter into a very peculiar
contradiction -- the limited political aim of war and the limitless character of total war, the
possibility of a contradiction?

I am saying what we find here -- and the reason for making this this overlong parenthesis – [is]
because we are going to find a problem which resonates with this one; I would say: what is the
objective of capital, and what is the aim of capital? The aim of capital is to produce for capital;
that’s its aim. What is the objective of the capital? The objective is unlimited. Capital’s objective
is to produce in order to produce. It is inevitable that, in some way, the limited aim of "producing
for capital" and the unlimited objective of "producing in order to produce" enter into at least an
apparent contradiction. Why do I add "at least an apparent"? This is because the contradiction
will obviously be resolved if there is, and if capitalism includes a means of resolving it, and a
concrete means, a kind of mechanism through which it [capitalism] does not cease to resolve it at
the same time as it introduces it [the contradiction]. If we discover this concrete mechanism by
which it does not stop solving it [the contradiction] at the same time that it [capitalism]
introduces it, we are simultaneously answering our question, "what is an immanent limit?",
namely that this limit is produced by the system, but produced in such a way that it does not
cease being pushed back as one approaches it.

Well, yes, yes, and that is part of the beauty, it seems to me, of Marx's text, to show us in the last
point, on the third level, that there is indeed in capitalism a mechanism that is working in such a
way that the contradiction between the unlimited objective and the limited aim, between
"producing for the sake of producing" and "producing for capital", that this contradiction finds its
solution, finds its resolution thanks to a typically capitalist process. And this typically capitalist
process is what Marx sums up in the following expression: periodic depreciation ... "periodic
depreciation of existing capital and creation of new capital."4 Do you perhaps sense that we are
getting closer, -- but we are trying to get closer to something concrete in a very, very gradual,
very careful way -- we are already getting closer to something concrete? If we want to
understand even a little bit, for example, about the current oil-nuclear narrative, you can see that
this is the typical case of this periodic process of capitalism, namely: depreciation of existing
capital-creation of new capital; this corresponds exactly! This is why, here as well, the oil crisis
is not imposed on capitalism from the outside, but that it is really a limit, in the sense of an
immanent limit, depreciation of a type of qualified capital-recreation of a new capital. This is
absolutely necessary so that, precisely, the limit is produced as both what we keep getting closer
to, and what recedes as we get closer to it. It is the process of creating a new capital on the
periodic depreciation of existing capital that is going to be, it seems to me, one of the most
fundamental capitalist processes.

And so, let's just try to draw a conclusion. If you understand this point, that capitalism works on
precisely these two phases -- this kind of double phase: depreciation of capital-creation of a new
capital – that gives us something. That provides a status to something which is, in fact, very

                                                                                                       6

maddening in capitalism, namely its powerlessness -- here, we will try to see this concretely -- its
powerlessness to go into reverse. What does “to go into reverse” mean? Obviously, that cannot
mean going back to… to… the ax, the flint, the primitive state, etc. ; it is not about that, but the
powerlessness in political and economic choices to return even to something that would have
been possible a few years before, as if, in fact, the nature of the immanent limit literally defined
what we must call an irreversible arrow, an irreversible course of capitalism, which obviously
causes our misfortune.

What do I mean here? So here, we must try to speak concrete; we have to start all over. If I
summarize the set of notions that I am grasping in this second heading of saturation, I am saying:
saturation is the immanent limit. I am saying: the immanent limit is a limit that is both produced
by the system, to which the system keeps getting closer, and which recedes as one gets closer to
it. I am saying: the relation with this limit, the relation of the system with this limit, defines an
irreversible arrow, an irreversible course, good, etc.

And a book has just been published that I find very beautiful, so… it is… it is… and… and
which seems to me to be… which concerns a completely different subject, but which seems to
me to be an illustration of this subject, if I try to say concretely, well yeah, you see how it works,
the immanent limit. It's a book by Robert Linhart, ... which is kind of an investigation into what's
going on in Brazil right now. The book is called Sugar and Hunger. Sugar and Hunger, f-a-i-m,
and has as… as a subtitle, “An investigation into the sugar regions of northeastern Brazil”.5
There we are; I would just like to relate some points from this book, and read some passages.
And my only comment would be to mark what way I need this, that is, how this is the very
illustration of one of the overly abstract topics that I have just tried to develop.

Linhart tells us one thing that… he says it so perfectly that, I mean, even if we thought this, he
recreates it for us… fine. It's very beautiful, the way he says it. He says this: you know, hunger,
well yeah ... the problem of hunger in the world, right, hungry people, ... obviously, this is not a
... this not an exterior limit. This is what he calls "produced" hunger. In a way, we all know that
hunger is produced. What am I trying to say, more confusedly, when I speak of an immanent
limit? Well, this is precisely in opposition to an exterior limit; in other words, hunger is not
encountered as the result of scarcity; it is produced as the result of an organization. In other
words, although the word is not pretty, we must speak of a hunger, f-a-i-m, as "sophisticated" in
opposition to ... or else a hunger that is not at all a hunger from scarcity; it is not hunger from
scarcity at all. What is produced is hunger, there you are ..., there you are; the system produces
hunger. This is ... there we have it, the ... the immanent limit. How does it produce hunger?

One must show that it [the system] produces it in the very process of its development, that capital
produces hunger in the very process of its development. So, as a general idea, this is ... nil:
everyone… everyone will be ready to say, "okay, fine". Every time we find a concrete, an
extremely concrete analysis to make sense of these abstract expressions, this will obviously take
on a ... greater importance. Well, let's take the example of sugar cane in the northeastern region
of Brazil.

Here it is -- and I just need to add: this is indeed part of the process of "producing in order to
produce" and at the same time "producing for capital" -- the development of sugar cane, what

                                                                                                     7

does that mean? That means it's really a blind development, ok! More and more plots of land will
be taken by the sugar cane: to produce in order to produce sugar. You will ask me: why?
Because, at the same time ... it’s at the same time producing for capital, for sugar capital. Fine.
So, we produce in order to produce sugar because, by that very fact, it is the only way to produce
to produce for sugar capital. What does this mean? This means that each plot of land will be
planted with sugar cane. So, what does that mean? That means: development of a huge property,
a large landholding. You see, to produce in order to produce sugar and to produce sugar capital,
this apparent contradiction is already being completely dissipated! There is only sugar capital
that can produce sugar in order to produce sugar. Everywhere you go, [it’s] to make cane sugar:
this is not nothing, that, because [there’s] an immediate consequence – sense in what way
[there’s] the limit; once again I'm relating all of this to show, in a specific case, how the limit is
produced from within and not encountered from outside -- because… what is going to happen, if
you are in this situation?

You ... you can conceive it: this is indeed a question of developing capital, not of its creation. In
other words, you can imagine that this situation, compared to the previous situation, has at least
two catastrophic characteristics, two catastrophic characteristics from the point of view of the
populations. First characteristic: collapse of private land plots. Ah well, yes, in ... in the early
stages of sugar capital, this is a kind of stage of the big farm, but the big farm, however strict the
regime -- and this was not ... and this was no party! -- the big farm still preserves for agricultural
workers the possibility of small private land plots where they can grow diversified crops, a
minimum, a minimum of diversified crops. The development of sugar capital -- sugar cane
everywhere -- has for its first consequence, what? Monoculture.

And I am not telling anyone something that ... I am not saying, no ... I am not teaching anyone
anything if I recall that one of the fundamental problems of Third World economy is precisely
the capitalist misdeeds of monoculture, or of monoproduction. Why? Because it is within this
monoculture already that we understand how, already, the limit is produced from within. In what
sense? In the sense that all the land is occupied in the form of the large property which wipes out
all that was left of the private land plots that could be cultivated by the agricultural workers.
Practically they go to the city. Once again, it's not that the old days on the farm were good: on
the contrary: it was… there are even positive reasons why they emigrated to the city. But, really,
there is a movement that must indeed be called deterritorialization. This will be the basis for the
formation of large city slums. And furthermore, any possibility of a diversified, somewhat
diversified food is eliminated. Specifically, the small private land plots allowed the maintenance
of a certain heterogeneity in the diet. Monoculture has a catastrophic result which is there is no
longer any local possibility of a diverse food supply. The homogeneous food of the Brazilian
northeast becomes, not even the absence of food; in a sense, it's almost worse -- well worse… we
don't know what is the worst -- it's a kind of black bean: a starchy black bean type, the regional
food there.

Here we have Linhart's text which strikes me as very ... if you follow me, it seems to me that
here we grasp on the spot the constitution of ... of what I called the immanent limit. This is
precisely what he calls "a modern hunger". I mean, a modern hunger is, if you will, hunger, f-a-im, immanent hunger; this is not a primitive hunger, or so-called "primitive". This is not a hunger
that would be the encounter with shortage; this is a hunger produced by the mechanism of

                                                                                                    8

modern capital. This is what he says; I’ll read slowly: the text seems to me very ... very clear,
right: "As I collected testimonies and data, hunger appeared to me with terrible clarity, like the
material and the product of a device complicated to the point of refinement. Hunger was not a
merely dramatic, almost accidental absence of available food." -- That would be external hunger;
it would be "shortage" hunger, -- "... as they present it to us when they want us to believe that it
would be enough to quench it by charity or emergency relief movements. The hunger of the
Brazilian northeast was an essential part of what the military power called the development of
Brazil”. In the end, just as the limit is a constituent element of development, hunger is a de…
constituent element of development.

"This was not a simple hunger, a primitive hunger; it was an elaborate hunger, a perfected
hunger, a hunger in full flight, in short, a modern hunger. I saw it progressing in waves, called
economic plans, development projects, industrial poles, incentives for agriculture, investment,
mechanization and modernization of agriculture”. -- Indeed, this sugar monoculture implies a
highly industrialized agriculture. -- “It took a lot of work to produce that hunger. In fact, a lot of
people were working at it quite hard. This took place in buildings, in offices, in palaces, and in
all kinds of command and control posts. This hunger buzzed with purchase orders sent by Telex,
with lines of credit in dollars, marks, francs, yen, with feverish transactions. They were never
done going into the details of producing this hunger. Store owners, bankers, shipowners,
executives, experts, businessmen had their share of this, as did an army of intermediaries, brokerdealers and consulting firms, planning institutes, and generals, politicians, police officers.
Through its very characteristics, this hunger was confused with the development of the mode of
production, a sugar-based monoculture, a monotony of food, a slow, patient hunger, a snacking
hunger progressing at the rate of the market economy."

And in fact, he quotes the testimony -- here I… -- he quotes the testimony of a doctor who
analyzes very well this type of hunger linked to a monoculture, and there you are… The doctor
says: yes, with the disappearance of a … small land plots, where an agriculture could still be
maintained, … a somewhat diversified culture, with the development of a sugar-based, very,
very industrialized monoculture, "now we encounter sugar cane even in the cities, and the
peasants no longer see any other food than black beans, cassava, exceptionally dried meat: no
fish, no milk, no vitamins. Malnutrition during embryonic life and the first eighteen months of
childhood leads to permanent mental impairment. Children are missing up to sixty percent of the
brain's neurons, and this destruction is irreparable. Another consequence: the average size of
peasants decreases”, etc., etc.

There you have it, if you will; as the first point, I am saying that, if one understands this well...
this notion of produced hunger, what Linhart proposes we call "modern hunger", the hunger
which is produced by a process of development as such, we have exactly what I was trying to
have you sense, to have you understand, namely this status of the immanent limit. And I would
like to discover if we also have the means of giving a concrete status to the idea of the
irreversible arrow, something irreversible in this movement through which a limit is produced, a
limit constantly pushed back, at the same time as it is reached. For this process is terrible; I mean
hunger has never been a way in which ... through which people are killed. In a way, this would
be almost too good if ... if people, as they say, they ... they would die from this. There are many
people who are dying of hunger, but what is terrible about hunger is that hunger also multiplies

                                                                                                      9

the hungry, that is, it reproduces in this way as many as it destroys in this way. And this is indeed
the process of the limit which is perpetually pushed back at the same time as we approach it and
never stop approaching it.

And in fact, what is this irreversible arrow in the capitalist system? I am trying to return here to
this same situation in Brazil. Here is what Linhart tells us: it is that the development of the highly
industrialized sugar-based monoculture which ravages and wipes out all the small remaining
plots, well, this is not yet the final word because here is the tale that he relates to us and which is
very fascinating, it seems to me. It is that this sugar-based monoculture has a first major stage of
development, namely, to produce sugar for the sake of producing sugar, but it does not stop
there. A second big stage of development [is] sugar alcohol being used as a mixture for gasoline
to make the cars run. Fine, this corresponds well to producing in order to produce: something
must be done with this overproduction. The sugar market is not doing well, the global market ...
So, fine, they’re going to use some of the al ... the alcohol in sugar to make cheaper gasoline.
Okay, so this is ... I am saying this is a second stage of development since it is no longer about
large land ownership: the whole automobile industry is entering the race for sugar development.

Only what will happen? Starting from a certain proportion, sugar alcohol in relation to gasoline
(here as well, this is very proportional), special motors are needed. As long as the proportion is
minimal, you can still do it by ... by adapting the classic engines, the engines in classic cars.
When the proportion increases, sugar alcohol in relation to gasoline, special engines are needed.
So, there is a need to initiate, to build factories that will manufacture these engines, obviously,
with foreign capital. This is what occurs in this region of northeastern Brazil. That involves huge
investments. Here I do not need to force or develop this; I assume you understand immediately:
this is the same, this is even an example of this process or this irreversible arrow that I was
talking about earlier, namely "depreciation of existing capital-recreation of new capital". I am
saying: sugar-based capital is undergoing a depreciation as evidenced by the global price of
sugar, which, in fact, is very low. The depreciation of existing sugar-based capital corresponds to
a recreation of new capital, this time in the automotive industry, which will use sugar alcohol
provided that a new type of engine is built.

Result: if I take these two stages of sugar cultivation -- sugar cultivation, in a first stage of
development, which destroys all the plots of land, all the plots that would have allowed the
maintenance of a still diversified diet; second stage: transition to the automotive industry which
will manufacture types of engine -- sense that even if I could say: at the first stage, one
revolution was still enough, let's say… forgive me a random word: a “limited” (restreinte)
revolution was still enough to bring down the sugar monoculture, for example, to reform
cooperatives, to reestablish the possibility of a relatively diversified diet, etc., at the second
stage, this is no longer possible. Why? Because it is the aggregate of industrial investments that
themselves depend on this sugar monoculture. To reverse this will imply, at that moment, much
more difficult, much more complex operations, will imply an all the more radical revolution,
which, at that moment, collides, at that time, with interests that are so multiplied that it [the
monoculture] risks being liquidated.

So, that means that things weren't going well before; afterwards, things are even worse. At the
same time, it is…. it's the progression of this limit, if you will, this kind of very, very curious

                                                                                                      10

limit, this kind of really gnawing limit, right, which makes you keep approaching it, [while] it
recedes, and at the same time, it outlines an absolutely irreversible arrow. Irreversible…
irreversible in what sense? Well, it will take ... measures will be needed. For example, it is
obvious, it is obvious that… in order for Brazil… right, to emerge from a situation, for example,
an insane situation which is the situation of the northeast, well… it will be… it will be much
more difficult now, where industrial investment is caught up in this kind of movement, and has
taken over from the sugar-based cultivation movement, than ten years ago. Fine. This is what I
wanted to call this kind of saturation, which is a very weird saturation, since you can see that it
never stops receding as one continues approaching it.

Well, then I would almost like there to be the… the counterweight, that all this analysis
consisting in saying very quickly in what sense all this is hopeless, might at the same time be an
analysis in the sense of… what is possible? what… what can happen? What…? And if you will,
we can see very well how the stages of capitalism there unfold in this ... in the form of this step,
really, a kind of limping step. I call a “limping step" this kind of limp that corresponds to
"depreciation of capital-recreation of new capital". And that this is obviously at the hinge point
of these two phases, of this limp, that revolutionary movements intervene ... Yes?

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: No, it occurs at the level of the global market. For example, the depreciation of sugarbased capital occurs at the level of global sugar prices; it occurs at the level of "producing in
order to produce".

The student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Oh no, yes, you're right, no, no. You see, I wouldn't want to, I can't be clearer. Are
there any ... So, in this "saturation" heading, I would put all these problems of limit of... as I just
outlined them, yes, if you can see. Yes?

Georges Comtesse: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes.

Georges Comtesse: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Yes -- [Deleuze talks to someone near him: You are going to be there.] -- Yes.

Georges Comtesse: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Yeah, yeah, yeah. [Interruption of the recording] [46: 09]

Part 2

                                                                                                     11

… As for this problem: how to go back onto a given state of monoculture? So I would like to
read, here, precisely, in my per… in… what Comtesse has just added, … a short passage from
Linhart on the history of motors: “The day the first separate pumps for the fuel… for fuel derived
from cane alcohol were installed, the populations of the northeast were condemned to a further
worsening of their lot" -- that's it, the immanent limit which is perpetually reconstituted -- "As
long as the limitation was to add a proportion of cane alcohol, 14% , to gasoline, there was no
need to modify the motors; one could remain in a provisional state, changing policy. Henceforth,
special engines are needed: Volkswagen is already producing them. Other manufacturers will
follow. The third pump means a major conversion of the automotive industry and investments.
No question of going back. Do you understand what that means? The condition for the cost of
this new fuel not to become prohibitive is that the wages of the sugar can workers must be
maintained at a level of misery. Until now, these farm workers were confronted only with a class
of landowners dealing with declining economic and political movement. Henceforth, they will
also clash with the powerful multinational auto companies, and sugar will devour more tracts of
land, wiping out what remains of food crops. This is the hunger" -- f-a-i-m -- "of the northeast
that will allow cars to roll throughout the entire country.” Good, very clear, there is nothing to
add, there you go. Nothing to add to all this; … yes?

A student: [Inaudible] ... This isn't the first time that [Inaudible] ... in the 19th century, ...
[Inaudible]

Deleuze: Yes, yes. Yes, yes, yes. Well, the coffee monoculture would be exactly… yes, I am not
saying at all that this is linked either to sugar, or to recent events; it has always been a…
fundamental question, and, once again, if there is among the specific problems of the Third
World, there is basically this problem of monoculture, and of mono-industry! Take the case, we
could almost have placed this whole analytical test, well, this insufficient analytical test that I am
proposing to you, we could have placed it under the sign of… of the small country where it
happened… of the small Third World country, where recently such strange things happened and
which was like an exemplary case: the… the old Dutch Guiana… Suriname, that's Suriname, it's
called that, Suriname, you see, this little country… it's the old Dutch Guiana, which is wedged
between the old English Guiana, and the old French Guiana.

Ok, what happened there? Well, I have, I ... I want more detailed information. I'm sticking to ...
an article in Le Monde. Le Monde says: there, in my memory, there is what? It's ... it's a country
with about, say, five hundred thousand inhabitants. I may be wrong, but roughly: five hundred
thousand inhabitants. Monoproduction: this is ... this ... you find that all the time.
Monoproduction: bauxite. Fine. [Pause] What other characteristics? Population ... population, as
in so many Third World countries -- that will interest us, we will see why later -- an extremely
mixed population, since [they are] descendants of black slaves, but also descendants of a second
wave, who are Indians especially, right, and who were brought in when… when… with the
abolition of slavery, the… the Dutch, there, the Netherlands,… brought… a lot… of… Indian
laborers. Fine. So, [it’s] a population with a strong racial mix [métissage]. Large influx of
emigration, out of the ... about half of them leave the Netherlands. Huge bureaucracy, but oddly,
the bureaucracy is provided by the formerly English Guiana, by the neighboring country. A
bureaucracy, because we'll see that there are specific bureaucratic problems in a third ... in Third
World countries, obviously.

                                                                                                    12

So, there is everything there, so that we can get our bearings: capitalist monoproduction: bauxite
-- that is, really at the same time, producing in order to produce and producing for capital --;
influx, influx of emigration: half of the population that leaves from the Netherlands; constitution
of a typical Third World bureaucracy, provided by the neighboring country ... Curious to think of
all these movements at once! Well then, there too, this is perpetually the production of the limit
... How the system never encounters an external limit, does not stop producing its limit. Okay,
we'll come back to all these points. Under this second "saturation" heading, do you see anything
to add or is it clear enough? Yes?

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Yes. Yes… Yes, yes, yes. Yes, in that, you are completely right to say that, there, we
retain it, that almost -- but it anticipates other topics that I wanted to tackle --, so I already
remember that if you follow this kind of law identified by Marx, right, of capitalism, namely: as
capital develops, the share of constant capital, that is, invested in machines, outweighs the part of
variable capital invested in labor, that basically explains the status of current labor. What is the
current labor problem? We note -- and here we have to ask ourselves why -- I mean: both in the
Third World countries and in the central countries (pays du centre), what do we notice? The
development… the growing development of so-called "precarious" forms of labor. What are the
precarious forms of labor? Precarious forms of labor are either underground (noir) labor, or
temporary work, [Pause] or, at the extreme, the increase in unemployment which means the
preponderant share of precarious labor: this is the multiplication of forms of the worker’s status -
- temporary worker, precarious worker, all that.

Still in the same book, Linhart analyzes the forms of precarious labor. For example, as
agricultural workers gradually no longer live on the land of large estates, but migrate to the
slums, they increasingly assume the status of precarious workers. But at the same time, what is
happening in the rich countries, in the so-called developed countries, in the central countries, for
example, in countries like ours? Well, everyone sees it: it's, it's the multiplication, the increasing
importance of the same forms of temporary and precarious labor, as if, here, the situation of the
central countries and the situation of Third World countries were bizarrely not that much
different. What is happening currently? So, one would really have to be a very, very… classic
economist to say that this is an accident. It is obviously not an accident, it is not an accident
linked to a moment of crisis; it is really the expression of the deepest tendency in the
development of capitalism. This tendency can be stated in the following way, exactly using
Marx's terms: as constant capital becomes more and more important in relation to variable
capital -- you remember, "variable capital" is capital which has to do with labor --, as constant
capital -- which has to do with the means of production -- takes on an increasingly greater
importance, if only by automation in relation to constant capital, in relation to variable capital,
the forms of labor become forms of precarious labor, forms of underground labor, forms of
temporary labor. Fine. And there ...

Comtesse: Would the limit of that be, for example, the disappearance of work?

Deleuze: Yeah!

                                                                                                        13

A student: And the dispossession ...

Deleuze: Oh yes, yeah.

Comtesse: … for example, a day later, a day after [Lionel] Stoléru paraded at the Sorbonne,6 the
next day, on Monday on Antenne 2, he declares with incredible cynicism, he declares this: if
the… the workers, when the workers will be… we will cost too much, we will replace them with
industrial robots ...

Deleuze: Yes? Yes, yes, yes, yes. And I am saying: what concerns you, for example, in particular
in this situation? You know it well, that is, this has already been said a thousand times, but
precisely what I'm trying to do is to bring together as many notions as possible that are ... that
would be a little bit functional. It’s that ... what about the students as students in all this? It is that
the students, as the forms of underground labor, temporary labor, or so-called precarious labor
develop, in all senses of the word "precarious", students are fundamentally caught, and are
almost at the forefront, of this category of “precarious labor”.

So… for the Third World, it has been often analyzed, especially by Samir Amin, eh?7 But in the
central countries, to my knowledge -- and here, it is now or never to pay them one more homage
-- it is not by chance that in the central countries, the first to have grasped this essential, not
accidental characteristic, the first to have told us: but you know, the development of temporary
labor, precarious labor, etc. is… it is not an accident in modern capitalism, it is really its
fundamental tendency, this is not the crisis, it's not… it's not oil, it's not… it's… it belongs to
[capitalism], fundamentally, for the simplest reasons, the easiest to explain… this is Italy. It's
Italy, because, very strangely, Italy is… it's a kind of prodigious country, where the forms of
precarious labor… so there we see… -- I'm preparing a topic to come, for us later --, that things
are not ... they never are ... although there are irreversible arrows, this is not at all a reason to
despair, because the form of erratic work has a force… it has very, very great revolutionary
potential. The kind of double Italian sector, where really there ... the existence of a double sector
was asserted very quickly: a kind of underground sector, of temporary sector, of precarious
sector, which finally became kind of like the very condition without which the Italian economy
would not work; all of this has been analyzed, it seems to me, very, very deeply by all the
autonomous current in Italy, right? I mean, this is one of the main contributions in theory or in…
the practical theory of contemporary labor, the contribution of Toni Negri's analyses, or in
Germany, you will find that, you find that especially in… Negri in Italy… you will find that in
Germany with a good author called [Karl Heinz] Roth, r-o-t-h, who wrote a recent book,…
[published] with Bourgois: L’autre mouvement ouvrier [The other workers movement]. In
France, you have several guys who have been working a lot on these precarious forms of labor
which have developed in France for several years very, very ... very powerfully ...8

And I am preparing some more consoling conclusions for later: it is that, once again, the
revolutionary potentialities of these immanent limits, one can hardly say in advance -- and that is
very, very consoling -- to what extent it is the system that produces them, but to what extent they
turn against the system. The Italian situation… the Italian economic situation such as “precarious
work” would seem to mean that the Italian economy is reaching the extreme of such labor, but,
in fact, it is this precarious labor that has become an indispensable element for the whole

                                                                                                   14

economy. Consequently, the new forms of struggle that become possible ... the way in which,
necessarily, the struggles henceforth go beyond the narrow framework of the company, the
factory, necessarily situate their locus much more in a neighborhood (quartier), a region, etc.
Why then does the PC, the PCI [Italian Communist Party] … what is the difference in this
respect between the labor policy of the PCI, and the labor policy… of Autonomy? This is where
I think the differences become very, very concrete. Why does the PC insist on maintaining the
corporate framework? Well, it's obvious, really, it's obvious. Fine. Let's move on to a third
heading -- unless we take a break ...?!

Claire Parnet: Oh no, we’re not tired. Are you tired?

Deleuze: No? I would say a "third heading," but you cut me off if you see any other ... you see, I
want every heading to be inflatable, really, so we can add things to it. Third heading: I am still
trying to apply to this axiomatic of… to create this axiomatic of politics.

I am saying: you remember that, in an axiomatic, well, the axiomatic does not itself refer to a
model to be realized, but it refers to models of realization and that the whole topic that I
proposed to you – a very abstract topic at that point, but which should now become more
concrete --, the whole topic that I proposed was that modern States were not like archaic empires,
not models to be realized, the archaic imperial model, but functioned as models of realization in
relation to the axiomatic. What we will call a "model of realization in relation to an axiomatic" is
a domain in which the purely functional relations of the axiomatic are realized, realized in very
different ways, in varying ways. In the axiomatic example that I had given here, at a purely
mathematical level, I said: well, take an axiomatic with two axioms or with three axioms that I
had defined, and you see that it is realized both in the addition of whole numbers and in the
composition of displacements in Euclidean space. We will say: the addition of whole numbers
and the composition of the displacements in space are like two models of realization of the
axiomatic, that is, two of the domains in which this axiomatic is realized.9

I am now saying, regarding the political situation, States -- I do not claim to exhaust their nature
--, I am saying, one of the aspects of modern States is that they function as models of realization
of the axioms of capital, that is, these are the domains in which the axiomatics of capital are
realized. And it’s through this that I answered the question: why does capitalism need the "State"
form when, at first glance, it could do without, or could even reverse this form? The answer was:
if capitalism has maintained the "State" form and recreated a particular structure of modern
States, it is for a very simple reason: it is because [capitalism] completely changed their nature; it
needed States because States provided it with the best… the best models of realization for its
axiomatic. So, there you have it, so that's a relatively ... relatively simple answer. I am saying:
let's accept that as a hypothesis and see where it takes us.

You immediately see that we are already led to distinguish two notions. We are led to distinguish
the two notions of “homogeneity” and “isomorphy”. What is the distinction between
"homogeneous" and "isomorphic"? Well, I think it's obvious that "State" forms can be very
different from each other. It’s not about saying "all States are equal": this is not true, not all
States are equal to one another. It is not a question of saying either that ... perhaps one must not
say either that ... there are some ... good ones and others not good: that’s not it, that’s not it.

                                                                                                    15

Rather, we should say: well yes, there are very heterogeneous forms of States; in other words,
States are heterogeneous. Modern States are heterogeneous. We have already seen a first
bipolarity "totalitarian State-social democratic State" -- it is not true that these are equal, no --.
There is a heterogeneity of totalitarian States and social-democratic States, even when there is
interpenetration of ... when, there are elements of one within the other ... it is not the same thing.
But I am saying: States can be heterogeneous and yet be isomorphic.

What are "isomorphs"? "Isomorphs" will mean: they are both models of realization for one and
the same axiomatic. So heterogeneous States can be isomorphic. A totalitarian State and a socialdemocratic State can be two domains of realization for one and the same axiomatic; in this way,
they are isomorphic, and yet they are not homogeneous. Likewise, I would roughly say, to
resume the comparison I was making, the addition of whole numbers and the composition of
displacements in space are not two homogeneous domains; these are absolutely heterogeneous!
These are no less isomorphic insofar as they are two models of realization for one and the same
axiomatic: the same axiomatic is realized in one and in the other of the two domains.

So, I would say: there you have it, can we say that all States, even heterogeneous, are
isomorphic? This abstract question can have a certain concrete interest, … it could lead us to…
to qualify things, that is, to seek the whole, to seek to determine the set of bipolarities of States
modern. I was saying: a first bipolarity ... what is it that shows, roughly speaking, that one could
assume a kind of isomorphy of all States, whatever they are, an isomorphy, again, without
homogeneity? Well, this fundamental economic data point, namely: there is only one and the
same global market, there is only one and the same global market, namely the capitalist market.
For it is difficult to understand anything at all if we do not take this into account: that the
socialist countries themselves are awash within a global market which is the capitalist global
market. So, it is the existence of one and the same global market ... And ... -- [Deleuze whispers
to someone apparently delivering mail] Hello ... thank you very much; ohh! ohh, this mail.
Cagnard, there some more mail for you! Thank you, eh, thank you very much --. So, yes…

A student: One and the same global market ...

Deleuze: Oh yes! One and the same global market implies this kind of isomorphism of the most
... and most heterogeneous States ... and formations, of the most, State-like States. And I am
saying: we saw a first bipolarity, this bipolarity which varied with the respective position of the
internal market in relation to the external market, it applies above all -- I am not saying at all
exclusively --, it applies above all for the States that I would call "central States" (États du
centre). What would the central States imply from an axiomatic point of view? It would already
imply a lot of questions, which I have ... I have not yet addressed at all, here, and which I am
citing ... which I am citing ... which I am listing, without wanting to analyze them.

I mean: why must an axiomatic be centered? Does it belong to an axiomatic to have a center, and
what? Well, for example, a center and a periphery? Are there axioms of the center and axioms of
the periphery? And what would this distinction mean in an axiomatic of the center and of the
periphery? And the fact is: if, for example, you refer to [Fernand] Braudel’s famous analyses on
the formation of capitalism, I believe that, in Braudel’s texts, he insists enormously on this point:
how the development of capitalism implied the formation of a center in what Braudel calls,

                                                                                                     16

precisely, by creating this concept somewhat, "the world-economy" (l’économie-monde)? Why is
the “world-economy” fundamentally a centered economy? With the essential problem that
Braudel analyzes in detail: how was the center formed in the capitalist world-economy?10

Answer: why was it formed in Europe at a particular time, and why was there a kind of rivalry
between southern and northern Europe, and why did the north win? The question is all the more
important for us as it was in the North that, at the same time, the true forms, or the most solid,
the most consistent of the "State" forms, were taking hold. This is also where the center of this
world-economy was established from the point of view ... or the center of this axiomatic. And it
is at the center that this first bipolarity that we saw very quickly developed: "addition of axiomssubtraction of axioms", or if you prefer, "totalitarian pole-social-democratic pole". But I am
saying: aren't there other ... aren't there other bipolarities?

My first remark: starting from 1918, the center saw the imposition -- here, I am weighing my
words because we cannot say that [the center] favored this, right -- saw the imposition of a
second bipolarity, namely, that of capitalist States, and so-called socialist States or those called
"socialist-bureaucratic". [Pause] I resume my series of questions, or my presentation of
questions: can we say that socialist States, or so-called "socialist-bureaucratic", and capitalist
States are homogeneous? As I am trying to bring together a certain ... a certain number of
political data, if you will, since the last war, it is worth remembering that: it has been said often
... it has been said often, and many authors have developed the topic of a homogeneity, of an
increasingly advanced homogenization of the so-called socialist States and of the capitalist
States. One of the first to develop this topic after the war was an American named [James]
Burnham, but the topic has been reexamined ... thousands of times. Fine.11

What does that mean, that there would be homogeneity? Is there even a need to invoke
homogeneity? A good number of authors have indeed analyzed the structures of bureaucratic
socialism and thought that it was really of crude appearance, which allowed a kind of
homogeneity to be discussed -- for example, it is the development of planning, it is the role of
planning, it is the development of the bureaucracy, but all that, it is… it is very vague because,
each time, the question reverberates: is the so-called "socialist" bureaucracy the same as
capitalist bureaucracy ... or even Third-World bureaucracy, every time there is a need for very,
very careful differential analyses ...?

But, at the point we have reached, we would tend to tell ourselves rather: this question is not of
much interest, because there is no need for States to be homogeneous in order to be isomorphic.
At the extreme, we could -- it's not even sure that we could -- but I'm just saying: at the point we
have reached in our analysis, we could speak at the extreme of an isomorphy of capitalist States
and of so-called "socialist" States without this isomorphy leading to the slightest homogeneity!
That would only mean that these are heterogeneous models of realization, in relation to an
axiomatic which remains the axiomatic of capital. In any case, I am saying that the center has
seen the imposition of a second bipolarity between the capitalist State and the socialistbureaucratic State.

And then, everyone knows that ... it was not imposed -- that is why the words must be qualified -
-: that the center organized a third bipolarity. The second bipolarity, I would call it -- you might

                                                                                                        17

as well do geography, like everyone else -- I would call it: a "West-East" bipolarity. The third
bipolarity which belongs to the axiomatic of capital, this time, has not been imposed; it
organized this third bipolarity: it is the famous "North-South" bipolarity. "North-South", there
was only a fictitious geography, right! There is only ... yes, fictitious geography. I mean ...: the
South could very well be the North, what can that do? It is a vector: the "North-South" vector.
It's a bit like the limit that is always pushed back: you can very well find South in the North!
Well fine… why not? It does not matter since it designates a vector, an economic-political
vector. And this time around, that third bipolarity is the ... bipolarity between States in the
center-States of the periphery, or what is more simply called "Third World." Fine. The South
vector is the Third World.

And we still have a South, right? Besides, France has its South; it has its South which is in the
process of… which is in the process of being prepared, or which is starting to express itself
strongly… Corsica, Brittany -- Brittany, it's the south of France, it's not going well… right, as a
vector, it is the South --, good. As Giscard said, you remember, in… in… in his… in his big… in
his big speech…: it's annoying, the more balance there is between the West and the East, the
more things become unbalanced from North to South. And this is very important to us, because
that is the production of the limit; that is our only reason for hope. Otherwise, we'd be screwed,
right! Okay, so I am saying: this is a third bipolarity.

Well, my question is this: so, without even having to say it, all States… This third “North-South”
bipolarity, I can say that it had two major stages: the organization of colonization, this is how it
is organized, and then with the end of the colony, with the end of colonies, of colonization, the
organization of a Third World by capitalism, well, States of the Third World. My question is
therefore: it is not at all a question of saying all that is homogeneous! It is a question of asking
the question: to what extent are all these formations and all these bipolarities ... to what extent
are all these State formations isomorphic, even if they are very heterogeneous? You see, that
can't ... it's a question that can only be thought about in relation to their functioning in relation to
the global market.

I am returning here, and I am taking a minimum of risks without ... but without seeming to,
without telling you why, that's perfect. I am taking a minimum of risks because I am trying to
give, then, some very simple definitions, at my ... at my own risk and peril, of two very common
notions: "mode of production" and "relation of production". I would say: well, here it is, you
understand, a mode of production, for me, I mean, it's not complicated, I'm not at all trying to say
things… learned, or even technical things… I would say: a mode of production is closely
determined by the role of the force of labor [Pause] in the production system. What defines a
mode of production is the style -- I am using a very vague word, on purpose --, the style, the
allure of the force of… the status of the force of labor in a production system. That, I would call
it ... by convention, I would call it the "mode of production". I would call the "relation of
production" this time around, the status and nature of wealth securities (titres de richesse) in the
production system. [Pause]

You can already see where I am going with this; I would say, at the limit -- once again, I don't
think it's ... it's not that what I’m saying is deep, not at all deep, right, but it's not orthodox, I am
specifying : here, I do not claim to be anyone, I am just attempting to provide a reference point

                                                                                                     18

for myself, right, it's convenient for me --, I would say, at the limit, to bring together some things
that we have just seen, I would say: the mode of production is always on the side of the status
(l’état) of variable capital in the system. What allows you to define a mode of production is
ultimately the status of variable capital. What allows you to define the corresponding production
ratio is the status of constant capital. Not that the… not that all these notions merge, but they are
linked.

Fine, on that point, with as much lightness as possible, I tell myself: well, so-called capitalist
countries, what are the so-called capitalist States? These are States in which the mode of
production is capitalist, and the relation of production is capitalist. What does this mean? This
means that the major form of the wealth security is capital. We have seen it, we have seen it --
there, I will not go back over this; it is even the only thing on which I have truly insisted --:
capital does not designate means of production; it designates property rights or wealth securities
that can be invested in the means of production, which are not at all the same thing. Fine. So, I
can say that there is a relation of production that can be determined as capitalist: it is when
capital determines the relation of production, that is, when the wealth securities are identical to
capital itself. What is the capitalist mode of production? It is when the labor force has the status
of wage earners ... well, which implies capitalist surplus value -- which is not the same as feudal
surplus value, or surplus value in other systems --.

So, I can say: central States are basically capitalist states, that is, the relation of production and
the mode of production is capital there ... are capitalist there. What is going on, and how could
one define very, very lightly, there, very ... like that, to be able to identify so-called
"bureaucratic" socialism ... no, [to identify] so-called “socialists” or “socialist-bureaucratic”
countries? What is that, I mean, if we ask the question: where does the capital come from? In a
capitalist country, capital comes from capital, hence the famous concept of the so-called
primitive accumulation of capital. And how does capital come from capital? Because, precisely,
capital defines convertible wealth securities. In a so-called socialist country, where does capital
come from? You see, what defines capitalism, once again, is not capital; it is the fact that capital
there is the relation of production or the wealth security. In a socialist country, the wealth
security or the ratio of production is not capital. However, there is capital, there is a production
of capital in so-called socialist countries. So, what is the wealth security, that is, the element that
will allow the creation of capital? I think it can be said: a country is socialist-bureaucratic when
the wealth security, or the element which enables the manufacture of capital, is not capital, but is
the [economic] plan; this is the plan.

You will ask me: how do you create capital with planning? It’s no more difficult to do ... than
when you create capital with capital, no more difficult! I mean… or else, [it’s] as difficult, as
difficult. But it is obviously planning which, since the Leninist period, has been the constituent
element of the manufacture of domestic capital for the USSR. I mean: if the so-called “socialist
State" and "capitalist State" are not homogeneous, it seems to me that it is for a simple reason:
it’s because one can always homogenize, if one takes things in midstream; to say, ah, but
capitalism has developed lots of planning and has attached more and more importance to
planning, you see, for example, the "New Deal"; and we can say… -- or look at… Hitler's
Germany --… and then we can also say: and look at the socialist countries, the importance of
planning. But what matters is ... it's very silly to take things as ... in a ... by isolating it from

                                                                                                        19

movement. Its movement is in fact the opposite: in socialist-bureaucratic countries, it is capital
that depends on the plan; I mean it is the plan that is the building block of capital. In capitalist
countries, there may well be a plan, and even a relatively powerful plan on certain occasions, for
example, in France, at the Liberation, yes. It is just the other way around: it is capital that is the
building block for the pieces of planned production. The "capital-plan" relation changes
completely in one case and the other.

As a result, in the case of so-called socialist States, it seems to me that we would be entitled to
say: but, of course, no relation of production relation exists there; the relation of production is
not capital, it’s the plan. It’s the plan which determines the relation of production, and this is not
a capitalist relation of production -- once again, that does not mean that it is better: it is
something different -- whereas in capitalism, whether there is a plan or not, there, the relation of
production is indeed capital itself. And that does not prevent socialist-bureaucratic States from
being isomorphic in relation to the axiomatic of capital, that is, they are domains of realization.

So what could I say to finish up with these… you understand, it's a kind of… -- just ignore this if
that doesn't interest you -- for me, this is a kind of purely terminological outline. What can I say
about the Third World States? There is hardly a problem there. I mean, there are a small number
of Third World States that we can identify as having an affinity with socialist-bureaucratic
States, and sometimes even like ... I don't know, ... with hopes, with certain hopes that… the
USSR no longer allows us to have; I think, for example, of Mozambique, fine. But the majority
of Third World States are more on the side of the capitalist states. In what sense? In the sense
that the relation of production is capital there; the relation of production is all the more capital
there since these Third World States favor, according to the totalitarian expression, the external
sector, that is, give absolute priority to the external sector, the exemplary case, the exemplary
case [being] sugar-based monoculture.

But I would say, what makes the specificity, what makes the heterogeneity of the Third World
States, is that even in this case in which the relation of production is capital, the mode of
production is not necessarily capitalist, not at all. What can it be? It can still be -- but I put "still"
in quotation marks -- it can "still" be even more or less, more or less, slave-based; [Pause] or it
may "still" be more or less feudal. Why do I put "still" in quotes? Because there would be a
misunderstanding -- which, it seems to me, certain Marxist authors have made in this regard -- a
misunderstanding “still” to be avoided. The misunderstanding is to say, yes, these are remnants
(restes), they are vestiges (survivances). Yes, for example, the slave-based side, of the large
plantation, or the feudal side of certain forms of Third World agriculture, or of certain modes of
Third World production, are vestiges. These are what Marxists call transitional forms. The most
perfect case of the so-called transitional form was the cultivation of cotton under slavery, in the
slave states of America, before the Civil War.

What interests me is that at the point we’ve reached, I would say, this is not transitional at all.
Why? I take up a remark which seems to me the basis of all of Samir Amin's research, Samir
Amin being a Marxist economist who seems to me, or who seems to many people, to be one of
the most important in the study, in the current state of studying Third World economies -- Samir,
then, Amin, a-m-i- . One of his particularly good books, I believe, is ... is called Unequal
Development.12 The basis of Amin's thesis is that, far from being transitional forms, it’s a

                                                                                                           20

question here of peripheral forms. What does that mean, perfectly contemporary peripheral
forms? These are not vestiges. In fact, “contemporary peripheral forms”, what is this idea based
on? It is based on this observation, on this basic observation, namely: the economy of the Third
World is a perfectly modern economy. What is typical, what is exemplary about the Third World
economy? It is not an economy that has remained half-primitive; on the contrary, it is an ultramodern economy, namely: oil installations, industrialized agriculture, of the "sugar" type or
"fruit company" type. This is all an absolutely modern economy.

These are therefore not at all forms of vestiges, but they are the conditions of the axioms proper
to the periphery that results in the relation of production there being completely capitalist, and so
I would say -- this is why I was developing this whole terminological research that floats a little
... a little ... a little bit ... in a vacuum --, I would say: the relation of production is capitalist there,
but not necessarily the mode of production. The mode of production can very well be quasislave-based, quasi-feudal, and not at all as a vestige, but by a nature specific to the axioms of the
periphery. Why? And what would the axioms of the periphery be, which would make possible
these kind of somewhat monstrous States, monstrous States in which the relation of production is
capitalist, without the mode of production being so, and yet without there being that much of a
contradiction?

This is why it seems obvious to me that before the Civil War, in the context of ... American
slavery, that the cotton companies, that the cotton cultivation worked with a slave regime, and
does not at all seem a transitional form, not at all. Not at all. This is… this is… this is a figure
from the periphery. What happened with the Civil War is not at all the elimination of a vestige: it
is that the entire USA has been constituted as states of the center, as states of the West, whereas
some of these states were still under the “periphery” formula, before. They were centralized, they
were de-per-iph-er-ized? [Deleuze pronounces the syllables this word one by one: dé-pé-ri-phéri-sés] But, you will see that the other movement also exists. I'm just saying: well obviously,
what are the axioms proper to the periphery? Samir Amin offers some -- and this is what I find
the best, myself, in his analyses --, in Unequal Development, he searches a bit: he does not use
the word "axiom", but it really comes down to that. He is looking for, he indeed says that the
Third World States are extremely ... themselves heterogeneous among themselves, very, very
different ... He distinguishes several kinds: he distinguishes the Oriental kind, the Arab kind, the
American kind: South America… well, he distinguishes four of them -- I don't remember which
one is the fourth… Arab, Oriental -- and Africa, of course! The African kind, which is really
very, very different.

But, very broadly speaking, the properly peripheral axioms would be: to the very high
development of large landed property, why is it an axiom -- there you have it, the first great
axiom of the periphery -- why is it specific to the periphery? An immediate response: if you
remember our previous analyses -- there, I ... I am only reminding you ... a very quick reminder -
-: you remember that I tried to show how at the center -- it was only valid for the center, this,
what I was saying at the time -- land rent and land ownership had been liquidated by capitalism
from its inception, and that this was inevitable, that this was inevitable to the extent that the
flows of forms of capital (flux des capitaux), the flows of capital (flux du capital), implied a kind
of decoding of flows. It is inevitable that land rent was as an element rejected by capitalism; it
was rejected by the central States in two forms, in the English form or in the French form, at the

                                                                                                      21

beginning of capitalism. It was rejected in the English form of land rent, and from then on,
interest in large landholdings was rejected by European capitalism in the English form through
alliance with American wheat, which did not pay land rent, precisely because America, at that
time, still was playing the peripheral role, or in the French form, through small peasant property.
In both cases, capitalism was breaking with the land structure. And in fact, the capitalist relation
of production could only emerge at the center…13 [Interruption of the recording] [92: 52]

Part 3

… large landholdings, either in the form of an outside company’s properties -- the fruit company,
for example -- or even locally-sourced landholdings, huge landholdings. Peripheral capitalism
needs, at least capitalism applied to the periphery, needs a development of land ownership as
such, whereas at the center, it has gone through a trend of eliminating land rent.

That is the first point that seems to me to be very important, and one cannot say, and once again,
in my opinion, it would be a misunderstanding to say: large land ownership in Third World
countries is linked to a simple vestige. It is so little linked to a simple vestige that the current data
of the economy, or one point of the current data of Third World economy, namely the existence
of highly industrialized monocultures, necessarily passes through this… immense land
ownership, through the existence of an immensity of land ownership since, we have seen it for
sugar there, since it goes all the way to eliminating all the small peasant land plots.

A second characteristic -- so here I would say is the first axiom specific to ... peripheral States, to
Third World states --, a second axiom: a form of commerce, and there, I indeed believe that ...
this is ... it goes to, credit for this goes to the Chinese Marxists, not current ones, the old ones,
you know, who created a category or who proposed the existence of a particular economic
category that they called -- borrowing the word, I believe, I suppose from Spanish --: "comprador
trade". "Comprador trade", what is it? It's… it's… it's a category -- and here too I'm being very
quick… there has been a lot of Maoist literature on comprador trade like… and this is in order to
understand something unique to the Third World, and this is a category that seems very, very
interesting to me. -- Comprador trade is a particularly ... cruel, particularly formidable type of
trade that creates, how shall I put it ... very vaguely ... creates the connection between external
capitalism and the rural hinterland. This is a kind of unleashed commerce, where the commercial
relation then implies a very, very ... very important regime of violence and usury, where again
one would want to say at first glance: oh, this is a vestige! Not at all. This is a current mode of
functioning in Third World economies.

In Linhart's book, I’m returning there to a very short allusion to this comprador trade, but as it is
very concrete, I will relate it: you see, the peasants ... the peasants who no longer even have any
plots of land within this sugar-based monoculture -- they no longer have land plots, they can no
longer cultivate, there, a small plot that would allow the diversification of food -- and they have
to purchase, and they are absolutely defenseless, for example, at the shop established on the large
property, and which will create the link between external capitalism, which animates the sugarbased monoculture, and the rural hinterland of the small poor peasants. And here is Linhart's text
which makes it easier to understand than anything I might say: “However, food” -- a peasant
explains that what he sells or doesn’t is all the same, right -- “… everyone went into debt to buy

                                                                                                        22

the seeds, and upon selling ... what remains of the small land plots, and at sale, at harvest which
was good, no one earned anything from it. Many sold their entire harvest without managing to
pay the banks, so even a good harvest pushes us even deeper into misery” -- that's what
Comtesse… that's what you described earlier, right -- “It's the same everywhere: what we harvest
has no value. The larger the harvest, the more hunger there is. Question: yet food is sold very
expensively! Where does the difference go? Answer: to trade” – So, this is not just any trade, this
is the comprador trade. -- "This is the devil's trade here." -- This is exactly what ... what the ...
Maoists call trade ... comprador trade --. "This is the devil's trade here, there is no control. The
harvest lasts three months, it's a crazy time; the trader wants to buy everything at a very low
price. Then he will sell it for a high price" -- this is a trade that implies this storage, eh -- "the
government lets this happen (laisse faire). In reality, the government is only interested in export
culture.” That is, the government is only interested in the external sector, in relation to foreign
capital, to foreign capitalism. And it is the ... the comprador trade that reaps the very profitable
function, bringing immense profits, of ensuring the junction between production oriented
towards the external sector and consumption in the hinterland. You see, comprador trade would
therefore be a category, or an axiom, of the Third World States, and we can see right away, in
fact, that here too this is not at all a vestige, right?

Let us add: a third axiom specific to the Third World, that proletarianization, or if you prefer,…
the misery, there, of… of… or the becoming of these peasants who no longer have any land
plots, etc., the proletariat… proletarianization does not take place there at all in the same way as
in Europe, as it occurred in Europe with the development of capitalism. As Samir Amin says,
proletarianization is marginalization as well. It’s inseparable from the constitution of slums.
Conversely, the force, the role of peasants in this process of proletarianization is very different
from that of Europe ... good. Yet another axiom that… Amin tries to… analyze: bureaucracy in
the Third World, which also has a very different role, both from the role it had in Europe, or that
it has in Europe in capitalist countries, and from the role it has in the so-called socialist countries.
It doesn't matter, right? Anyway, I am saying that it is in the book, Unequal Development, that
all this is analyzed most precisely.

I'm just trying to draw conclusions from this quick review. I would say: well yes, once again,
Third World States, could we not define them as, in many cases, the relation of production is
capitalist, but the mode of production there is not capitalist, and that this is so not as a vestige,
but by virtue ... but by virtue of axioms, organized axioms specific to the periphery, organized
axioms specific to this Third World? As a result, of course, political resistance movements or
revolutionary political movements also have a structure or potential that is very different from
those here.

What do I mean? Because, at the same time, we should add almost the opposite. It seems to me
that we should at the same time relativize Samir Amin's theses, if I… and… but almost to
relativize them to make them even more, even stronger or even more convincing, because there it
is… there you are, Samir Amin tells us: the Third World economy is not at all a lagging
economy; it is an extremely modern economy, once again, of the metallurgy type, huge
metallurgy, petroleum, industrialized agriculture. So, the Third World economy is… it's… it's
really not… I mean, it's… it's entirely distorted to present it as a “developing” economy. That's
what…, that's already where there is the abominable lie. It is not at all a developing economy; it

                                                                                                      23

is an economy… one cannot say that, for example, the monoculture of sugar,… in the Brazilian
northeast is… the sign of an economy in the process of developing; it's a wildly modern
economy! It's a ... high-industry economy, that's even why ... that's even why the situation is so
tragic!

Well… I am saying this: what does that mean? We will say: what was it that allowed this
displacement of a highly developed economic sector in the Third World? This is even what
would distinguish, in what is called the Third World from the former colonies: in the former
colonies, there was an undeveloped economy. What do we call the Third World today? There are
cases, for example, Africa, it would pose ... all kinds of problems. It depends on which region of
Africa. There are undeveloped areas, etc., but that is not what constitutes the Third World’s acute
problem. The Third World’s acute problem is that it is the object of a highly developed economy,
a completely twisted economy, really, a completely harmful economy, a catastrophic economy,
but highly developed, highly industrialized. What allowed this transfer of a developed economy
into the Third World? What made it possible is precisely our law of capital, namely that the
center has reserved for itself more and more, temporarily -- it is not even certain that it will be ...
that it will be for a long time --, the center reserved more and more for itself the sectors not of
advanced industry or advanced agriculture, but of advanced automation. I am saying: that is one
with the law of capital that we have seen. The…

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: That's it. Constant capital becomes more and more important and starts by gaining
importance in the center itself. So capital, the axioms of the center, have more and more reserved
an automated sector for themselves. Good. Hence the job crisis at the center, right? On the other
hand, there emigrated -- and ... it matters a lot, for example, in what is called "the crisis in
metallurgy", "the crisis in the steel industry in Europe", it matters enormously that a highly
industrialized, highly specialized steel industry established itself in Third World countries. So
wherever one is… it's… it's a situation… it's definitely part of these dead-end things of
capitalism, because… it creates the kinds of holes of… crisis in Europe, and that is also the crisis
economy… in the Third World! It’s amazing, this stuff! -- So ... but, I am saying: we must go
further. Why must we go further? You have to relativize everything, Samir Amin, because, on
the one hand, I don't see any contradiction. I imagine, there would not be much a contradiction if,
in a few years, highly automated sectors were established in Third World countries -- Brazil, all
that… - Yes?

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: [It’s] possible; me… I don't know. Let me finish; you will say if you agree or not,
because this is what I am telling myself, like that ...: it is very true that, in an axiomatic like the
one we are studying, in an axiomatic of capital, it is very true that there are axioms of the center
and axioms of the periphery. And I believe that the distinction of a center and a periphery
belongs to the axiomatic, yes. But, as capitalism develops, I would say the center becomes more
and more -- so taking up a concept that we’ve used often here -- the center is more and more
deterritorialized, and moreover, the centers are more and more deterritorialized. In its own way,
this is what’s expressed in the idea of the importance of multinationals. This does not mean that

                                                                                                      24

there is no center any longer! It means that there is a center, but that this center is less and less
localizable in a territory, which might even be the USA, which might be ... London, which might
be ... this place, that place. There is a kind of detachment from the center, or a detachment of the
centers from territorialities, in relation to territories. As a result, centers can be realized directly
on the periphery.

You will ask me: what will that change? Well, it is this alone which explains, it seems to me, the
reversal of movement that we have just seen, namely that at the center, at the same time as the
investment of constant capital increases, a force of labor is produced … sorry, a crisis of labor
occurs, that is, labor that passes more and more into underground forms, precarious forms,
temporary forms. What does this mean? This means that we must think of, it seems to me now --
and we will be led to think of it more and more -- the Third World’s existence not only as
peripheral in relation to the center, but the existence of all interior Third Worlds at the center.
The tendency and distribution of capitalism, which implies this "center-periphery" distinction,
means that, at the same time, everything is exchanged -- the center detaching more and more in
relation to the territory, being able to incarnate and be realized more and more directly at the
periphery; conversely, zones of true periphery are hollowed out in the center, as if it was no
longer enough to speak of Third Worlds, but that one had to assign Third Worlds in the process
of being formed at the very center of the system. So there, obviously, that seems to me very ...
very important for the future -- we'll see in what sense -- this formation of new Third Worlds or
what we have sometimes called: "Fourth Worlds". The Fourth Worlds are the Third Worlds
which are constituted in the very center because, that is, in the old territories of the center,
because the center has been deterritorialized and can be realized at the very periphery.

To conclude this point, I would just like to say -- then, let's go back to my question, my third
heading which was indeed “models of realization and isomorphy” -- : I can give several answers.
I can say: yes, ultimately all State formations, all modern States are isomorphic with respect to
the axiomatic of capital. This just doesn't mean “they are homogeneous”. This simply means that
it is the same axiomatic that is realized in different models. Another possible answer: no,
ultimately, they are not even isomorphic. For example, the central States can be said to be
isomorphic. Are the central States and the States… of the periphery, of the Third World,
isomorphic? There are many things that would make us want to say "yes". I mean, there, each
central State is no longer the same regime of the colony, it's true! But this was almost replaced
by the isomorphism. I mean, to me, it seems obvious that if you take the large central States,
each has its isomorphs in the Third World. For example, the Central African Republic regime,
there, the… [Jean-Bedel] Bokassa,14 right, … very isomorphic for France, fine. There are
African States that are very isomorphic to England; there are States, as someone was saying just
now, there are States that are isomorphic to the Federal Republic of Germany. Each has its own;
there are some very curious isomorphic relationships, yet there is very great heterogeneity
between these States.

Fine, what would that mean? Ultimately, we can speak of an isomorphy between these quite
heterogeneous States, but I am saying: ultimately as well, we can very well say the axiomatic
sustains a certain polymorphy. And in fact, the axiomatic of capital implies or sustains some
States which are capitalist both in relation to production and through the mode of production;
some States which are neither capitalist through the relation of production nor through the mode

                                                                                                                  25

of production, and which will nevertheless be models of realization in relation to the axiomatic
of capital; and finally some States, as is typical of a number of Third World States, which are
[Pause] capitalist in relation to production, and not through the mode of production. And all this
defines axiom coronas (couronnes), distinct axiom layers, and at the same time, with the transfer
of types of axioms from one point to another. Why? Because, once again, I am trying to
emphasize what there is in the global economy: it is the more and more… more and more
deterritorialized character of decision-making centers, namely that, … it's stupid when one…
when one thinks in fact of a kind of global government as hidden, which makes the decisions.
Even the Trilateral [Commission] isn't that, it's not that.15 The decision-making centers are really
more and more in a state of disconnection from the territories.

As a result, a decision that would have global significance ... we ... we will always find
multinationals there, but it could very well be made in Brazil, and as a function of the State of
Brazil currently. [The decision] is not required to go through the central agencies, all that,
because, in a way, there has been a detachment from the center through ... [Deleuze does not
complete the sentence] As a result, once again, at the same time, the center can be directly
established on the periphery and, on the other hand, the old center, the territorial center, can be
hollowed out by real small peripheries which arise. Fine, then, I would say: yes, the ... axiomatic,
in this case -- but we discover an idea dear to mathematicians – the axiomatic sustains, under
certain conditions, not only a heterogeneity of models of realization, but sometimes a real
polymorphy. Once again, the whole question for us is, what is ... what in all of this provides
reasons ... to believe that ... this is not screwed (foutu), right? Good. What time is it?

A student: Half past twelve.

Deleuze: Half past twelve? Good. Shall we keep going, or have you had enough? Eh? Have you
had enough?

A student: Almost ...

Deleuze: Okay, so let's stop, ok! Fine, I… well, I'll certainly finish next time. That's good,
because what's going on with ...? Ah yes! Next time, also I ask you then, after Easter, we will do
something different, ok! This will all be over. Think about what you want us to do, right! Ok,
we'll talk about that a bit next time. [End of the session] [1: 53: 45]

Notes

  The few lines of exchange up to here are located on the recording at the Bibliothèque Nationale, but not on the
recordings available at YouTube (hence, neither at Web Deleuze, nor on the Deleuze Seminars site).
  As was evident in this seminar’s sessions 8 and 9, and the short session 11, on the axiomatic and the four problems
specified by Deleuze, see plateau 13 (on the apparatus of capture), Proposition XIII. “Axiomatics and the present
day situation", A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 460-473 (Mille plateaux, pp. 575-590).
  On Clausewitz and these distinctions, see A Thousand Plateaus, pp. 419-421 (Mille plateaux, pp. 523-524).
  Marx addresses this topic in Capital, vol. 3, ch. 15.
  Robert Linhart, Le sucre et la faim (Paris : Minuit, 1980). Let us note that Deleuze needs to spell out the French
word for hunger, faim, to avoid confusion with its homophone, fin (the end, the goal).

                                                                                                                     26

  Lionel Stoléru was an economic advisor in the conservative government of Valéry Giscard d’Estaing.
  Samir Amin was a Franco-Egyptian Marxist economist, who died in 2018.
  In A Thousand Plateaus, p. 571, note 66, Deleuze and Guattari say: « A movement in Marxist research formed on
the basis of the works of Mario Tonti (Operai e capitale [Turin: G. Einaudi, 1971]; French translation, Ouvriers et
capital [Paris: Bourgois, 1977]), then that of Italian autonomy and Antonio Negri, whose name was to analyze the
new forms of work and the struggle against work. It was a question of showing simultaneously: 1) that the struggle
against work is not an accidental or “marginal” phenomenon in capitalism, but one essential to the composition of
capital (the growth in the proportion of constant capital), and 2) that this phenomenon engenders a new type of
worldwide struggle – workers’ struggles, popular struggles, ethnic struggles – in every domain. See Antonio Negri,
especially Marx and Beyond: Lesson on the Grundrisse, ed. Jim Fleming, trans. Harry Cleaver, Michael Ryan and
Mauriuzion Viano (South Hadley, MA: Bergin and Garvey, 1984); Karl Heinz Roth, Die “andere”
Arbeiterbewegung (Munich: Trikont, 1974); and the current work in France of Yann Moulier, Alain and Danièle
Guillerm, Benjamin Coriat, etc.” At the same time as this seminar occurred, the US journal Semiotext(e) published
an issue in a new “Intervention Series” entitled “Italy: Autonomia, Post-Political Politics,” Semiotext(e) III.3 (1980),
later re-published in a new edition, Autonomia, new edition: Post-Political Politics (New York: Semiotext(e), 2007).
  On these distinctions, see the current seminar, sessions 8 and 9 (February 5 and February 26, 1980).
   On this topic, Deleuze and Guattari say in A Thousand Plateaus, p. 584, note 59: “Braudel shows how this center
of gravity formed in northern Europe, but as the outcome of movements that, starting in the ninth and tenth
centuries, put the European space of the North and the South in competition or rivalry with one another (this
problem is not to be confused with that of the town-form and State-form, but does intersect with it). See « Naissance
d'une économie-monde », in Urbi, l (September 1979), pp. 3-20" (Mille plateaux, p. 584, note 59).
   By James Burnham, see his The Managerial Revolution (New York: John Day, 1941) [L'Ère des organisateurs
(Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1947)].
   Samir Amin, Le développement inégal. Essai sur les formations sociales du capitalisme périphérique (Paris:
Editions de Minuit, 1973).
   On the English alliance regarding American wheat, see session 8 (February 8, 1980).
   Bokassa was President of the Central African Republic from 1966-1976 and then emperor under the name of
Bokassa I, from 1976-1979.
   The Trilateral Commission, founded by David Rockefeller in 1973, is a private non-government, non-partisan
discussion group to foster discussion, cooperation and economic development between Japan, Western Europe and
North America.