1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema, Truth, and Time: The Falsifier, 1983-1984

Lecture 10, 31 January 1984 (Cinema Course 54)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, [not indicated] (Part 1), Antoine Storck (Part 2) and
[not indicated] (Part 3); additional revisions to the transcription and time stamp, Charles J.
Stivale

Translation: Billy Dean Goehring

Part 1

… obviously, they had to do with cinema, but what it came down to was this: [Pause] For a long
time, let’s say, the movement-image was in the driver’s seat, which isn’t to say it was the only
determining factor. In a certain way, the movement-image was determinant—in what way was it
mov–…determinant? Movement-images were the determining factor because the montage
they—plural—were put through, the montage applied to movement-images such that, through
the intermediary of montage, movement-images yielded an image of time, which was thereby
necessarily an indirect image of time.

The main idea—I’d like for you, basically, if it interests you, for you to see how—and I’ll go
further today—to try and put together the main touchstones for our investigation. See, let’s
assume this idea—it might not be true, for all I know, but right away, we’ll add, yeah, sure, but,
but, but we shouldn’t get ahead of ourselves: with that sort of time, we find phenomena we
should think of as aberrations in movement. There are aberrations in the movement of cinematic
movement-images.

While it’s true that, through montage, movement-images offer us an image of time—an indirect
image of time, necessarily—be careful! The sort of aberrations of movement already present in
the movement-image might already point the way to a direct time-image. Hence the significance
of these aberrations in movement, and in a way, cinema has from the beginning always been torn
between two regimes: that of the movement-image, insofar as it yields an indirect image of time
once subjected to montage, and that of aberrant movement, which reveals or makes us aware of a
direct time-image.

And these aberrations in movement were just as fundamental, just as important as movementimages themselves; it’s simply that they likely, we probably didn’t perceive them as we’ve since
learned to perceive them. Looking back, where did we learn to perceive them in a new way?
Well, it’s the fundamental event I described before: a groundbreaking moment which seems to
me more important than the sound revolution, again, because the sound revolution is only one
technological revolution among others. And revolution has never come down to technique or
technology. What was revolutionary, then? It was the relationship between movement and time
which came to be overturned—where, rather than deriving our image of time from movement-

                                                                                                      2

images, [Pause] now the movement-image, what remained of it, was but the first dimension of a
more profound image. This deeper image was a direct time-image; cinema would now give us
time-images. [Pause]

What was this reversal rooted in? At the base of this reversal was an interrogation, taken further
and further, of the movement-image’s laws. What was the law of the movement image? The
movement-image’s law was its sensorimotor scheme. [Pause] How is this sensorimotor scheme
the law governing movement-images? It’s insofar as the movement-image, governed by its
sensorimotor scheme, depicts a character in a given situation [Pause] who reacts to said situation
and modifies it, [Pause] a sensorimotor situation. Sensorimotor situations are the rule for
movement-images, such that the latter yields an indirect image of time.

What did this revolution entail? The revolution consisted in—and it’s on this that I’d like us to, I
think… because all of this is up for debate—in what sense? You’ll see why I’m interested in
organizing things this way. For reasons that should surprise no one, after the war, no one
believed in it; they no longer believed in it. They didn’t subscribe to it—not personally, not
politically, etc. The sensorimotor scheme was called into question, especially. Hadn’t that been
the case before? Yes, it was suspect before, certainly, but before it always came in the form of an
aberration in movement. Whereas now it’s no longer a matter of aberrations in movement; really,
it's a question of what’s normal or normative. The normative or normal state of things is now a
lack of sensorimotor situations.

Sensorimotor situations are the old way of doing things. Ah! The old way… [Pause] Now what
do we have? Something completely different. We have what I’ve called purely audio-visual
situations.1 [Pause] Meaning what? It means exactly… You understand here, right away we
ought to avoid a misunderstanding—as your investigation makes progress, you start to counter
yourself with objections—you could always say, well, cinemagoers have always been in and
faced with purely audio-visual situations, full stop. Yes, of course, obviously, but that’s not it;
that’s not the point. It’s about the character on the screen, [Pause] they were in sensorimotor
situations. What’s totally new is actually this new breed of character; but it isn’t that—it’s is a
way of more clearly grasping a new breed of character who sometimes doesn’t know what to do
and sometimes doesn’t want to.

At any rate, their situation exceeds any motor response. [Pause] It’s out of their hands—what is
in their hands? Seeing and hearing. Of course, then, they still do something—again, we should
always bear in mind that there’s more to the story; once you work out an idea, there are going to
be wrinkles—but what do they do? Ultimately, it’s no longer action, it’s—and I went over this a
lot, two years back—it’s… it’s a ballad.2 It’s a ballad, the film-ballad, playing with both senses
of the word, ballad: ballad as a stroll and ballad as a sung-danced poem. [Pause] They are ballad
films. So, [the character] might move quite a bit.

Take Taxi Driver, by [Martin] Scorsese [1967]—okay, what do we find? It isn’t action; what
does its movement consist in? That of perpetually being in a purely audio-visual situation, i.e., in
the mirror, he sees what’s happening on the sidewalk—that’s what I mean by “being in a purely
audio-visual situation.” And every character in so-called modern cinema, in the post-war
period… I brought up a few examples from Rossellini—if Rossellini founded this kind of cinema

                                                                                                    3

in Europe, it’s because—in his major early films—what defines neorealism isn’t any social
content—it’s that realism had previously come down to a purely sensorimotor scheme;
neorealism is this sensorimotor scheme’s rupture. It’s the guy faced with a audio-visual situation,
like that, and then—what can he do? He has no riposte; he has no response; he has no motor
scheme for responding to it. Hence, I described it as a cinema of seers, a cinema of visionaries.

In other words, the image is no longer sensorimotor—the movement-image, yielding an indirect
image of time; the image has become purely audio-visual and now yields a direct time-image.
It’s a cinema of seers. Well, as I was saying, does that make it a celebration of passivity? No. Of
course, there is passivity. There might be charming characters, the characters might be… they
might be bourgeois. In Rossellini’s work, they’re often bourgeois. Again, the bourgeois woman
in Europe 51 [1952], the bourgeois woman in Journey to Italy [1954]. In early Godard, they
were outsiders, [Pause], and so on. What do they have in common? They’re seers, visionaries.
[Pause]

So, that’s where the reversal comes in: movement is no longer primary in relation to an indirect
image; the movement-image is no longer primary in relation to an indirect image of time.
[Pause] So, that’s based on the requirements of a sensorimotor scheme, but now, what “open up”
a direct image of time, a direct time-image, are purely audio-visual situations. We penetrate into
the time-image. That’s still unclear, you might say. Yes, it isn’t clear yet! Why do sight-sound
situations, cut off from any motor extension—precisely because they’re cut off from any motor
extension—open onto a direct time-image? I’d like for you to appreciate how, in any
investigation, there’s a time where your idea hasn’t been filled in yet and is still only a matter of
intuition.

Then I assume that some, when I say that, right, there are some that don’t see it, there are some
who feel a bit lost, right? Our problem—I’m not saying that some are better than others, right,
because on the other hand, with other things, it’s different, it’s the other way around. Here we
have one line of inquiry, then, this overturning of the relationship between movement and time,
the course of which I’ve sort of sketched out by examining a situation with cinema. And I was
saying that, in that case, we have to recognize Rossellini, with everything that followed, as the
major engineer of this reversal in Europe. Well, he’s the first to have done it, it seems to me, the
first to achieve this time-movement reversal, such that movement is basically no more than the
residue of a deeper time-image; instead of being the principle whereby we derive an indirect
image of time, it became no more than the residue of a deeper time-image into which cinema was
to take us.

Hence, once again, the absurdity of the idea that cinematic images are necessarily in the present.
And again, when I say that that’s wrong, I’m not talking about flashbacks, which have never
brought cinematic images out of the present—[Pause] I have something completely different in
mind: namely, that, in these situations, if for example you think of [Alain] Resnais films, they’re
really films where time-images predominate, based on audio-visual situations. Thus—I’m not
trying to pin down an inventor, but if anyone invented it, it was Ozu in far-off Japan: even before
the war, he had achieved this major reversal. And then this reversal led to all sorts of
consequences. As we saw, because, alongside the time-image, other aspects would emerge, i.e.,
just as the image became a time-image, the visible and sound image became legible as well, a

                                                                                                  4

reading of visual images and sound images. And lastly, more and more, the camera would take
on functions of thought.

Well, that’s where I left off, and you can sense what we’re hoping for in our investigation—it
was, well, say, well, let’s put all that aside and see if we can’t find something happening in
philosophy, in a completely different time, in a completely different way, that also uniquely
bears upon the image, the regime of images. [Pause] Well, how might that have taken place? So,
with that, with that, then, we got to the first part of our investigation—here’s where I’d like for
you to take over for me, for this first step. Or there are several ways you might step in: you might
very well think there are things about this outline that don’t hold up; or you might think of some
things that confirm it—obviously, it’s the hypothesis I prefer [Laughter]—but at that point, you
need, you need to bring me proof, because such proof means revamping things. So, for example,
with Ozu, you might think that no, Ozu doesn’t, that Ozu doesn’t work, or that it’s even better
than I’m making it out to be, I don’t know. Ah, you have something to say? Good.

Hidenobu Suzuki [First Speaker]: I guess he’s going to say a few things, and then I’ll come in
afterwards.

Deleuze: Alright, I’m listening.

Second Speaker: I’ll start with a rather baseline impression, the distinction between empty
landscapes and still life. Watching Ozu’s films as a Japanese viewer, what I found inspiring,
touching, was above all, let’s say, his empty landscapes—and simplifying somewhat, I felt there
was something lasting about this image. And at the same time, what I felt, well, was—to
reference another image that gave me the same impression—a shot from Wenders, from Kings of
the Road [1976]: a truck starting to move, and there are powerlines overhead. So, there’s an odd
movement with the train station and wires, and that was my impression.

And so, well, after class, I thought about the relationship between empty landscape and still life,
and [Pause] from there, my feeling was that I asked myself: is there already something in empty
landscapes that evokes time, I mean even, well, in Ozu’s early films? [Pause] And [Pause] there,
well, on that, I wasn’t so sure how I felt, so, I talked to him, and he then gave me a few examples
of this idea, i.e., right, from the work of [Paul] Schrader—he tries to look at a sort of revolution
using the idea of painting. Then, well, starting from the mountain we first see, and then, well,
with a little understanding of what I want to do, I look for the mountain’s meaning, and then
third, looking at the mountain with, well, enough of an understanding at least, you no longer look
for the meaning “of the mountain.” And I’m trying to frame Ozu’s revolution along these lines,
and in my opinion, what might be interesting, if we’re looking for the presence of the image and
of time in—well, I’m getting ahead of myself—free indirect discourse in Japanese, which has a
place in Japanese culture, of course, well, we find this aspect of free indirect discourse all over
the idea of Zen. And so, well, I personally think that, to elucidate the idea of Zen, if we try to
look for, to explain using free indirect discourse, free indirect discourse as an aspect of Japanese
culture, it seems to me that it comes down to contemplation for Ozu, and that’s my general
impression.

                                                                                                       5

Deleuze: Great, great, I don’t understand. I mean, you’ve brought in a new concept; you’ve
brought in free indirect discourse, saying: well, it’s even closer to a time-image, to a direct timeimage, than either empty landscapes or still life. So, I’m very intrigued, but I don’t really
understand where free indirect discourse fits in, with Ozu.

Second Speaker: In other words, well… then… it’s that…

Suzuki: Can I say a few things?

Second Speaker: I can give some examples and then, okay…

Deleuze [to the Second Speaker]: And then we’ll pick back up.

Suzuki: Alright, then, if you want, I’ll go over what he said a little bit. And to sort of second his
thoughts, I mean, I also, well, I had the feeling that, well, I felt like, like, it seems a lot like how
you were describing still-life, like that was already there in the empty landscape, and then—just
speaking in terms of my baseline, gut feeling, I think that, well, I’m picking up a bit of what you
were calling “the pure, unchanging form of that which changes” in the empty landscape or shots
of empty interiors. And then, for example, I think, the example you brought up last time—the
shot from the beginning of the film, Floating Weeds [1959], the lighthouse with the bottle, the
beer bottle, and I think it’s a landscape, but at the same time, there’s a composition…

Deleuze: Where?

Suzuki: And I dwelt on the question that way for a while, looking for some examples. Because,
well, it’s been a long time since I’ve seen Ozu’s films, and my memory is a little hazy. But, for
example, at the very end, or near the end, of a film called—in French, I think it’s Late Autumn
[1960]—the mother and daughter are eating a sort of cake or Japanese dessert, at kind of a bistro,
and beside them is a window, and they’re really talking to each other, they’re chatting, there’s
both chatting, and then all of a sudden, their eyes move to the window. That is, what we see is
both of them face-to-face and then they both turn toward the wall where there’s a window, which
we don’t see, and then we see a mountain, and really, it’s the mountain head-on.

Or, in another film—I don’t know what it’s called in French, something like Start of Summer, I
think3—there’s a scene with an old couple in front of a museum, a museum in Tokyo, and
suddenly they watch a balloon floating up, and we watch it float up into the sky.

Or it reminds me, for example, of this scene from the end of the film, The Last Caprice [The End
of Summer, 1961], this elderly rural couple looking at the smoking chimney of the
crematorium—where they hold funerals; it turns out the grandfather of the family has died—so,
that was… so, if you will, examples of scenes that take place outside, if you will, of outdoor
landscapes. And there are, I also thought of examples of empty interiors from Late Spring
(1949), near the end, after the daughter’s marriage, the old man, her father, goes back to his,
well, to their house, and at one point we get a shot of the daughter’s room, empty, with a mirror.
And then I think of the shot—there’s not just one, there are several—of the hallway in Journey to
Tokyo (1953), the empty hallway. Or there’s the scene of the interior of the mistress’s house, the

                                                                                                    6

former mistress, in the Last Caprice: the structure of the house is such that there is a room right
next to the entrance, and then there’s a kind of small courtyard, with a hallway on the left, and
then there’s another room in back, and we can see in frame, in any case, in the foreground, in the
foreground, the room, then this small courtyard, and then a room further down. And precisely
when the father dies, when the grandfather dies, he’s in this room, the first room, and at one
point, we get a shot of the small courtyard before, if I recall correctly, before his son and
granddaughter arrive, i.e., after they’ve gotten the call from his mistress informing them of his
death.

Basically, with all these scenes that fit in, if you will, with how you’re classifying or categorizing
empty landscapes or empty interiors, I notice something that is, that… I pick up the same—how
should I put this? —I’m picking up the same thing I did with the shots you described as “still
life,” and sometimes I think there are compositions in those shots.

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes…

Suzuki: And so, if you will, that’s my first point—should I go on, or… ?

Deleuze: Obviously, of course…

Suzuki: No, I mean, if you prefer I didn’t…

Deleuze: Ah, in case I want to respond? Yes, because I don’t have to respond. That’s fine; I’m
on board with that. Well, what really struck me was, as you know, how problems are posed and
addressed. Well, suppose I’ve seen Ozu, I’ve read a bit on Ozu. In a job, we’re all there; we see
certain things; we read certain things. I was struck by the fact that every commentary, even the
best ones—since there were some great Japanese commentaries on Ozu, as well as European
ones—what struck me was how, I thought to myself, funny how they’re conflating these empty
spaces and still lifes. So, for them, they have the same effect. I’m not about to say to these folks,
you’re wrong. No, that’s not, that’s not what’s at issue. I can see that it has the same effect on
them. Now we’re lucky to have two Japanese students, two Japanese comrades, as they say.
[Laughter] And here our Japanese comrades say, “Well, yeah, if they’re both in the same
category, it’s because they leave the same impression on us.”

The immediate objection I want to make—not an objection—how can we tell which of us is
right? They say it’s the same effect; I say no, they don’t have the same effect. There’s no telling,
because the argument he gave, that there are in-betweens where you’d be hard-pressed to say
whether it’s empty space or whether it’s a still life, [Pause] that bothers me no more than it
bothers them or backs them up. Suppose that I’m right, that empty space and still life are really
distinct, are two very different things. When you have two different things, inherently different
things, you can always blend them such that it seems like there’s middle-ground between the
two—thus, that there are intermediaries or transitions between empty space and still life, so on
and so forth. Thus, that’s not where we disagree.

So, I think that the only deciding factor between us is our way of getting there, right. We both
start, we begin with feelings; hence why I claimed that there is never a concept with no affect.

                                                                                                        7

For me, these two types of images do not have the same effect. Of course, that’s a bit sneaky
because if they don’t affect me the same way, it’s because I already need for them to not have the
same effect on me. But who knows, which comes first? That doesn’t mean… [Interruption of the
recording] [34:38]

… understand, I’ll take what I can get where I can get it, I think, ah, well, if it doesn’t have the
same effect on me, it must be obvious. I immediately think of painting, and I think to myself how
we never mix up [Pause] landscape painting and still life painting. Well, on that point, I think—
hence why I developed, why I brought it up—Cézanne’s example, which isn’t a particularly clear
example, where already we find a strong awareness of empty landscapes. In a completely
different context from that of Japanese art, then—but not completely unrelated—we already find
a clear awareness of empty landscapes; there’s also a clear awareness of still lifes, and so? Well,
the composition isn’t the same, and yet, there can be all sorts of grey area, transitions between
the two.

And then I think, well, it’s not that I think they’re wrong, it’s that they’ve mixed them together,
and anyone who mixes them together will end up, as I see it—I’m not sure, which is why I’m
talking my way through it—they’re going to end up with a completely different problem from
mine. I’m not saying their problem won’t be a better one; it will be just as interesting, more or
less, but I’d be surprised—hence my reaction to all this about free indirect discourse, which
came up so unexpectedly—it wouldn’t surprise me if they insist on conflating empty space and
still life because they need it for a problem, which will turn out to be completely different from
the one I’ve been dealing with. That explains it, then, since they’re posing a different problem.
When people disagree, it’s always because they aren’t… they aren’t posing the same problem.

Why, then—I’m not just being stubborn and saying that a still life or empty space doesn’t have
the same impression on me with Ozu—but at the same time, why, why do I need it to be so? I
can describe an impression and my motivation for said impression; what’s my motivation? Well,
it’s that I’m already caught up in a problem: I don’t what to conflate what I’m calling audiovisual situations, on the one hand, and direct time-images on the other. Why not? Because
otherwise it gets messy, otherwise it doesn’t work, my whole thing falls to pieces.

What I mean is that just as sensorimotor situations correspond to an indirect image of time,
[Pause] so too do purely audio-visual situations [Pause] have their correlate in a direct timeimage. Obviously, it isn’t the same relationship: pure sensorimotor situations… [Deleuze
corrects himself] purely audio-visual situations will lead us to their corresponding time-image,
while sensorimotor situations won’t get us to a time-image, since their image of time was
indirect. They built an indirect image of time by way of montage. That doesn’t change the fact
that I absolutely need to distinguish between sensori… purely audio-visual situations and their
correlate, time… their correlate, the direct time-image.

So, if I need that, [Pause] if it really is a necessary distinction, there’s no helping it. I mean, I
could have avoided it earlier, but it can’t be helped now. There’s no way around it because
emptiness has to affect external or internal spaces. It’s the purely audio-visual situation. [Pause]
The direct time-image these situations lead to has to be distinct from such situations. How?
Exactly the same way, as the Japanese say, full is both distinguished and at the same time not

                                                                                                      8

distinguished from empty. [Pause] And so for me, emptinesses, empty interiors, empty
landscapes, can only constitute a audio-visual situation, but they do not yet provide a direct timeimage. Time-images can only be composed, can only be composed through a different form,
precisely that of the still life.

That’s why I need [Pause] the two to be distinct. Picking up there, then, going back… There are
some who can’t feel it—it’s necessary in two different ways, I believe: because I feel it, and
because my problem, at this point, requires it. You might ask, what about a problem? What do
you mean your problem “requires it”? Indeed, problems make demands. I mean, problems
always refer to conditions. A problem has certain conditions, the conditions for the problem
itself. That’s why problems aren’t solved by opinions; we’ve gone beyond opinions. In terms of
opinion, I felt that they were different; they felt that they were the same. That’s interesting, but it
doesn’t go very far, right? We could, we could spend all evening [Laughter], right. Problems are
different. Mine, then, is this business with audio-visual situations, direct time-images.

Thus, I need a clear distinction between empty space and still life even though they are strictly
correlative, and what’s more, I need for still lifes to be more in-depth. To the point, I need empty
landscapes, empty interiors, to be no more than an envelope for still life. [Pause] I need them to
have the same relationship as that between empty and full, whatever the relationship between
empty and full might be. Because, again—and here I’m circling back—when I say that there’s a
complementarity between purely audio-visual images (i.e., those cut off from any motor
extension) and direct time-images, a complementarity defining modern cinema, [Pause] all the
more reason that there be no confusion or identity between the two, not in the slightest.
Otherwise, I wouldn’t be able to make heads or tails of how it develops, how a time-image
develops.

Then, from there we get to the second part, where I still don’t know: they [the Japanese
students], they conflate them for reasons along those lines, because their impression is that it’s
better, but it’s not just because they feel that it’s better; it isn’t because they have a different
opinion from mine. We think we have opinions, but that’s too easy, see, it’s what’s terrible about
opinions. We think we have such and such an opinion; I’ll give you my opinion, but what we
don’t often realize in conversation, when we’re chatting—what we don’t realize is that our
opinions presuppose problems. Simply put, an opinion belies a problem we aren’t conscious of,
and we’ve never had a problem we didn’t make for ourselves. So, I’m offering my opinion; I
don’t know what the problem is. I don’t know what problem is guiding me.

What’s with the pressure of public opinion? That’s what it is! They conceal their problems and
ask for our opinion. [Laughter] Right, so, that’s why it works so well, and people are always
ready to give their opinion, right? They don’t know what their problem is; everything possible
has been done to hide it from them, you know? Well, they [the Japanese students] aren’t doing
that, but the very fact that they reject my proposed distinction makes me think they do so for the
sake of a very different problem, hence this odd reference out of the blue to free indirect
discourse. [Pause; Deleuze looks at Suzuki] Alright, go ahead! [Laughter]

Suzuki: So, there’s something else that stands out to me when I watch Ozu’s films, and it has to
do with the the gaze, the characters’ gaze. Well, I’m thinking of examples of scenes where the

                                                                                                    9

characters, where two characters, primarily, face each other. And, well, at least in later films,
Ozu’s post-war films, he shot them using a method which I think is called shot/reverse-shot. And
in fact, watching Ozu’s films, his characters don’t actually make eye contact—for example: if
you film a character talking like this, for example, more or less from the left, one character looks
slightly to the right, and usually, when you cut to the other character, they have to be facing the
opposite direction—I mean, in relation to the camera, slightly to the left—and in fact, Ozu
absolutely disregards this sort of thing, what’s taken to be sort of the grammar of filmmaking. He
even says: there is no grammar; he specifically says: I believe that filmmaking has no grammar.
What’s my problem with the gaze? Precisely that, if we disregard this way of filming
shot/reverse-shot, in a way, it troubles the position of the subject itself.

In addition, the way Ozu films these scenes, he does so from a very low angle. I don’t know what
they call it in French—it’s “low angle” in English—when filming his characters. And I have a
feeling, in any case, that it’s somehow tied to this problem of the gaze. This way of filming and
the problem of the subject in the Japanese language. That is to say, in Japanese, there is no—
grammatically, in any case—there is no subject. That is, uh, I don’t say “I,” or I can opt not to
say “I,” at least, when saying “I’m talking,” for example. The same thing goes for “you,” “you
all,” etc. And in Ozu’s films, ultimately, my sense is that, through this sort of unsettling of the
gaze, through this disturbance, my sense is sort of—How to put this?—at any rate, we no longer
know who’s seeing. Because the character, the characters are facing each other, but their eyes do
not meet. In any case, right, with respect to this sort of cinematic grammar, in a way the gaze
loses its subject, the subject as such, where the… at any rate, we don’t see who’s seeing, exactly.
That really stood out to me.

Then I thought about the sort of indiscernibility we’ve discussed before. From there I thought of
what Pasolini wrote about free indirect discourse. The way he describes this kind of obsessive
framing reminds me of Ozu’s preoccupation with fixed shots. That’s all why the linguistic
subject of free indirect discourse came up, which he [the second speaker] just now brought up.

And still on this problem of the gaze, I think that in a way it confirms what you talked about last
week. In any case, the issue with these strange gazes was already there, as far as I can tell, in
Ozu’s pre-war films. For example, in a film called I Flunked, But… [1930]: you see the students
coming in—it’s for an exam—and they’re really coming in the same one direction, and there’s
something funny about it, but also quite striking. That is, well, if you will, there’s kind of a
courtyard, since it’s a campus, and you can see several buildings, at least two buildings. But
nevertheless, when the bell rings, the students all uniformly walk into the same building—I
mean, how do they walk? Really, they’re all walking the same way. Or another film, called
Tokyo Chorus [1931]: there’s a scene where the main character, the protagonist, is at a zoo, and
suddenly this panic breaks out. I think there’s some lion or tiger or something that’s gotten loose,
and everyone’s running, but in this panic, everyone’s running the same direction. This kind of,
well, it’s almost manic, I feel… the way this sort of scene is constituted, constructed—I find it
rather bizarre in Ozu’s films.

And then, for example, I don’t know when the film was… after the war, at any rate—called
Early Spring [1956], certainly not “Late” [Spring], but “Early”—and at the very beginning, we
see people walking to the station, it’s the morning, everyone’s going to work, and everyone’s

                                                                                                 10

walking in the same direction, and really, no one is walking any other way. Or, for example,
there are scenes in Late Autumn [1960], where the girl and her fiancé are eating in a small
Chinese restaurant, and we see them from an angle, from behind, and they’re eating their food,
facing a wall which is like 30 centimeters from their heads… but they’re looking, well… they’re
both, like this, I’d say they’re lined up, right, and there is the wall. So, they’re looking in the
same direction, and even the way they’re eating: exactly the same, one, then the other.

Finally, there are examples like that, which stood out to me, and… and it sort of makes me think
either of scenes like that or those where, in most cases, like where there are two characters, and
they’re both sitting with the same posture, sitting or standing the same way. For example, I’m
thinking of this famous scene from Journey to Tokyo [1953]. [Airplane outside] The old couple
is on a short trip from Tokyo, leaving Tokyo, to a sea-side spa, and they’re walking around…
and at one point, they’re both sitting like this, facing the sea, and we see them from behind.

Or in the film, Late Autumn [1960], the young girl who ends up getting married at the end of the
film—it’s more like at the beginning—and she’s with her best friend, her and her best friend, and
they’re waiting, the friend who’s just gotten married is leaving with her husband for their
honeymoon, and so, we see them there, both of them, from behind, and it’s a really symmetrical
shot. There is—if I recall correctly—there’s a building on both sides, there’s a space further on,
there’s the railroad, and them waiting for the train. I think, then, for me, there are compositions
in these shots.

And then, I’m also reminded of the well-known scene from Floating Weeds [1959], the one with
the father and son going fishing, and there is… I think it’s the sea—wait, no, it’s a river—
flowing by, and they’re both, so, each has a fishing rod, fishing…

A student: [Inaudible question about the film’s title]

Suzuki: Floating Weeds, yes—and we see them fishing. And what they do, is they let—how
should I put this?—their lines drag in the current, and at some point, they reel back in, both of
them together, a little further upstream. And then [their lines] eventually come back: that’s all
they’re doing in terms of movement. And so, that’s happening, if I remember correctly, in the
same one shot. And again, at the very beginning of the film, I think it’s after the shot you
mentioned, with the beer bottle and a lighthouse, as the boat—which the actors are on—comes
into the harbor. All of a sudden, the camera’s on the boat itself, with the boat slowly moving, in
the same shot, we see the lighthouse moving like this.

Deleuze: Yeah, yeah, yeah, you can pile on with examples, sure.

Suzuki: What I’m getting at with these last few examples is that there is movement, but the
movement is no longer movement-as-action.

[Although this marks the line between Parts I and II in the Paris 8 recording, the audio is
uninterrupted] [59:05]

Part 2

                                                                                                  11

Deleuze: Obviously, obviously, but you had gone further earlier, that’s been settled. Once again,
the crisis of the movement-image doesn’t imply a lack of movement. It means, among other
things, that these movements are no longer residual, and that they don’t form an action. That,
that’s almost our starting point—I mean, you shouldn’t go back to where we started, because you
had already moved beyond it—I’m fine with that, because my sense is that, well, everything,
everything is coming into focus. I don’t know if it’s any clearer for you, but in fact, what he
wants is to pick up on a side problem; he’s caught up in a lateral problem, I think. [Pause] I’m
not saying it’s a bad one.

Let’s get back to the task at hand: hence why I was saying it came back to our starting point.
We’re no longer dealing with sensorimotor situations; these are purely audio-visual situations,
right. Purely audio-visual situations—what does that mean? Right away, we need to see what’s
entailed by this new perspective, what belongs to it. It goes without saying that the image’s
elements forge completely new relationships. Why? Precisely because the elements [Deleuze
corrects himself] the relationships between the image’s elements are no longer governed by any
sensorimotor scheme.

Once our sensorimotor scheme has melted away, we find ourselves in a purely audio-visual
situation. It goes without saying that, in such an image, elements are related in ways irreducible
to how they were before, when their relationships were enforced by a sensorimotor scheme.
Everything you just went over, as I see it, everything you just went over, the problem you
posed—and while you brought up free indirect discourse, that came down to saying that the
elements of the image in Ozu have autonomous relationships, irreducible to those dictated by any
sensorimotor scheme. The relationships they form are strangely free. As for this freedom of
relations, we’re familiar with it in its simplest form: false continuity, or mismatch cuts.4
Mismatch cuts from one image to another are fundamental—the mismatch might be the
direction, it might be the gaze, it might be anything, but it highlights how the relationship
between images is different, since their connection no longer conforms to sensorimotor
requirements. Thus, a new breed of relationship is born, what we might call free or autonomous
relationships between an image’s elements.

And then, Ozu stuck with silent film for a while, but think about how… it’s the same with
Bresson, it’s the same with Dreyer, [Pause] where there, too, the extent to which their
filmmaking already heralds—with the rupture and collapse of sensorimotor relationships, with
the rise of audio-visual situations, with the—the idea that, already, the elements of the image, its
visual elements and its audio elements, form relationships completely different from those
imposed by a sensorimotor scheme.

Hence, this new approach to filmmaking has completely reconfigured audio and visual
relationships in rather diverse ways, say, how Bresson famously understands the audio-visual
relationship. But, through all this kind of cinema, in Dreyer, in all of it, the image can form,
indeed, the image can have or can establish new relationships between these elements which
were otherwise repressed, held back by sensorimotor requirements. So, I claim that he [Suzuki]
is taking up a side problem, and that’s fine—Does anyone have a piece of chalk? [Pause] Ah,
here’s a piece on the floor [Pause] Oh, no, no, I’ll do it with my finger, if you want—

                                                                                                   12

[Deleuze goes to the board] See, if I put, if here I put the sensorimotor image—I’ll show you—
it’s an indirect image of time. What do they draw from each other? Montage, [Pause] right.
When I had—and here’s where I left off last time—when I reach purely audio-visual situations, I
have a purely audio-visual situation, i.e., our sensorimotor scheme is shaken or has collapsed.
Now, I claim—I’ll draw three arrows, like this, see? [Pause] From these purely audio-visual
situations, right, first arrow: they’ll open onto direct time-images, [Pause] and that will be a new
understanding or understandings of montage, what [Robert] Lapoujade suggested we really think
of as “montrage” rather than montage.5 Montage hasn’t necessarily—it might often be limited,
but it hasn’t disappeared; it’s just a completely different sort of montage. Based on purely audiovisual situations, what really brings us over into direct time-images is “montrage.” Which, last
time, I suggested we call “chronosigns.”

But, simultaneously, the sensorimo… the audio-visual situation doesn’t just use “montrage” to
open onto direct time-images. [Pause] What else does it do? The other thing it does this time
doesn’t correspond to the old form of montage; it has much more to do with former ways of
cutting. [Pause] Between its own elements, as an image, it will bring about completely new
relationships, either from one image to another, or within the same image, since such
relationships are no longer beholden to the demands of the sensorimotor.

And this is where I claim that not only do purely audio-visual images lead to direct time-images;
they also lead to “legible images.” By legibility, I mean these new relationships between
elements of the image or between two images, the now free audio-visual relationships which are
absolutely necessary, again, a necessary consequence. 6 If the image has ceased to be
sensorimotor, the elements of the image form original relationships: all these audio-visual
discrepancies—even in terms of audio, all the discrepancies between audio elements. It means, at
every turn, there are disconnects, offsets—and why? Because what hooks things together is the
sensorimotor scheme. Thus, we find a whole system of mutual “unhooking,” of the visual with
respect to the audio, of the audio with respect to the visual, of the audio with respect to the
dialogue, of the dialogue with respect to the audio, etc., etc., of color with respect to form, or
what have you. In other words, we’ll end up with a new Analytic of an image’s elements. And
that, I claimed, is no longer a time-image; it’s the legible image. It’s no longer a chronosign; it’s,
let’s call it—since we need a technical term for it—it’s, it’s the “lectosigns.” [Pause]

And then lastly, when the situation, the image, becomes purely one of audio-visual, there’s a
third direction which, this time, lines up much more with—I’ve done montage, cutting—this one
corresponds much more closely with the phenomenon of “framing” or “shooting.” Third, purely
audio-visual images will point to—in the same was they pointed to direct time-images and to the
autonomous relationships between its elements—third of all, they lead us to the camera’s noetic
functions, that is, the camera’s functions of thought. [Pause] Only, I was saying, right, so we can
have some points of reference so far as our terminology is concerned, let’s call them “noosigns,”
since in Greek, noos refers to the mind.

Thus, I claim that purely audio-visual images refer [first] to “chronosigns,” or direct timeimages, [second] to “lectosigns,” or new relationships between the image’s elements, [and third]
to “noosigns,” the thinking camera’s new functions. [Pause] See? So here, I’m putting all my

                                                                                                    13

sign-categories in those terms, since we could describe the purely audio-visual image in terms as
opsign, sonsign—opsign and sonsign, pointing to chronosigns, to lectosigns, to noosigns.

What I’m claiming, then, what he [Suzuki] just said—I was thinking, what’s so bad about my
account? Why does he want a different one? Obviously, he turned off at a different fork in the
road. From… we agree on this much: Ozu invents purely audio-visual images. For me, the first
thing that interested me was how—this is the top arrow [on the board]—how that leads to a
direct time-image. That is to say, I went from the sight-sound image to the direct time-image.
And well, he, he, [Pause] interestingly, he said, no, that doesn’t do it for us! What’s so surprising
is how they—they were interested in the other arrow. That’s why they refer me back to free
indirect discourse. With free indirect discourse, they may very well tell us, indeed, when the
image is one of audio-visual, it leads to new relationships between its audio and visual elements.
There’s a new “Analytic” of the image; the image has a certain legibility.

Hence all this about which character is looking in the image, and so on. He could just as well
ask, which one is hearing? Where is the noise coming from? Where does it come from, and how
is it related to the audio, the visual, or what not. In other words, that [on the board] is the line he
was interested in, that line there, the second one, the one that goes from the audio-visual image to
what I called lectosigns, the new relationships between the image’s elements. And so, ultimately,
someone else could come along and base their entire intervention on our third aspect. [Pause] Do
you see what I mean? Whereas, for me, my whole account was based on the first arrow, on this
point of view—I absolutely needed empty space and still life to be distinct, but if I move to the
second arrow, from the audio-visual image to the lectosign, I don’t need that distinction at all. I’d
need a totally different one; I’d need a different system of distinctions, namely, what new
relationships are formed between the image’s audio and visual elements, regardless of whether
the image is a still life or an empty space. [Pause]

You understand what I’m getting at? Here, I feel we’re touching on something—we’re not
making any progress on our project, but I think this is better—it’s obvious that… Nevertheless,
I’m glad I now understand where our two problems part ways. In my mind, then, I was planning
to first deal with the time-image, then the legible image, then the thought image. Well, for them,
clearly, it seems they’re much more immediately interested in the legible image, with the new
relationships between its visual elements.

And again, see, what makes these new relationships? They’re no longer selected according to a
sensorimotor scheme; they’re no longer filtered through the sensorimotor. Thus, they form rather
paradoxical relationships. If you consider late Godard, for example, the relationships between the
music, the audio and the visual, right, the way they’re related is astonishing, impossible even,
from the perspective of sensorimotricity. Don’t forget that in Godard’s penultimate film, Passion
[1982], where the worker stutters and the boss coughs, i.e., it’s the sign of an ailing
sensorimotricity, and Godard never let it slip by! It could just as easily have been a clubfoot, it
could have been anything. No, the cough, the boss’s cough and the worker’s stutter are clearly
essential parts of an approach to cinema. That doesn’t only make it, I’d argue—it’s not only a
visionary cinema; it’s also a type of cinema where the visual image—this is what you have to
understand, hence the role of text in Godard’s work, etc.—visual images and audio images as
such must be read. That’s not to say that they’re transformed into text, but their text can be seen

                                                                                                      14

and heard. Hence, we get free relationships between the text—for example, Godard’s electronic
text—visual elements, audio elements, all of it: free relationships, i.e., relationships free of any
sensorimotor requirements.

So, if they don’t want the same distinction I do, it’s because they’ve gone down a path where
there’s no need for such distinction; they’re dealing with a different problem. Obviously, then,
you’ll say, Well, isn’t that nice—aren’t you clever, taking all three problems. Yes, that does
make me clever, [Laughter] because I’d think of it as just another form of proof if one of you
says… [Pause] I’ll dismiss you out of hand if you say, All three problems are bad; they’re
poorly posed. But obviously, it would also be nice if one of you said, There’s a fourth aspect
you’ve missed, there’s a fifth aspect you’ve overlooked. Except my only fear is that, if we add
another aspect, it will be because my three are… are poorly put together. But if you like, in
keeping with—it’s not a discussion but a kind of, of collaborative inquiry—I feel that what we’re
doing today shows you how attentive and care I think is necessary, whenever you have an idea,
in trying to determine what problem it plugs into.

As I was saying, unless someone else wants to chime in… Circling back before we move on to
the other aspect—the clock is ticking, but that’s fine, I don’t think we’re wasting our time—
perhaps it’ll be clearer now. Something I said last time—because I thought it was funny; it’s
been on my mind—I was saying that we might describe four periods of slapstick.7 And then I
thought I had been a bit hasty; it’s silly. I’ll try to pick them back up. I think, say, you might
point out six, seven, maybe eight [periods]; I count four major periods, four slapstick eras…
[Interruption of the recording] [1:20:34]

… madness, there are still sensorimotor schemes, and what’s more, the most diverse
sensorimotor schemes, that is, all causal series intersect. I’d argue that the common thread tying
slapstick together is famously the pursuit, [Max] Sennett, right, and the like. With that sort of
slapstick, there were always—you get these intersecting causal series corresponding to as many
sensorimotor schemes, and it all swarms on the screen, multiplying, teeming, reinforced,
colliding, right. That, I’d say, is the first age of slapstick, which gave us all the great slapstick
actors.

What about the second stage? Well, in the second stage… I’d argue that the first stage
corresponded neatly to the sensorimotor image. [Pause] Obviously, in this second period,
sensorimotricity carries on, it persists, and, what’s more, it is refined as time goes on, refining
quite a bit. To cite a few examples: Harold Lloyd invents a vertical sensorimotricity. You might
ask, did he invent it? No, his wasn’t the first; at any rate, he makes a structure out of it, a vertical
sensorimotricity, a climbing sensorimotricity. I’m not suggesting that it didn’t exist beforehand;
he draws parts of it from earlier slapstick.

Laurel and Hardy invent a sensorimotricity that breaks down over time, which I see as an
incredible breakthrough. [Pause] One of them whacks the other, or is whacked by the other, the
principle of “tit-for-tat”—this fantastic temporal decomposition is just one element, one main
component of Laurel and Hardy’s slapstick.

                                                                                                     15

Buster Keaton invented something extraordinary known as “the trajectory gag,” that is, a long
sequence shot in this wide array of different movements combines into a single trajectory.
[Pause] For example, he goes down—off the top of my head, I don’t remember too well—he
goes down a fireman’s pole, there you see, like a in fire station, he falls onto the firetruck just as
they’re leaving, the truck makes him tumble, etc., he’ll fall onto a horse, and it’ll be a single
shot—which was quite the feat at the time—there’s a famous shot like that, where in one long
take, in one long sequence, he gets off the train, he knocks over the water tower… no, he triggers
the water tower so it dumps onto the bandits, right. But it’s all one sequence-shot, see, a whole
array of different movements united as one trajectory. That’s the great, great… some great
Buster Keaton. Thus, I claim, in this second period, the sensorimotor obviously remains, but
again, its form is refined more and more. And everyone has their own signature: there’s a Tramp
sensorimotricity, there’s a… whereas before, it wasn’t really like that. The great [Max] Sennett
had a signature style, but, [Pause] well, they all had their signature, right, their sensorimotor
patterns, one of the fundamental elements of slapstick, their own “bits.”

What defines this second stage? It’s not just that it retains the sensorimotricity. It’s that, I was
saying, it introduces affective elements. It introduces affective elements, [Pause] and it’ll
regulate its sensorimotor patterns, using affective rules and categories to regulate its
sensorimotor patterns. [Pause] And the advent of the affective in slapstick won’t make it any less
slapstick. It isn’t a mix between slapstick and melodrama; we get a new form of slapstick, and it
moves in two opposite directions, as you might imagine. If the place of affectivity or affect’s
expression is as we’ve discussed, as we’ve discussed in detail, right—if it takes place in the face,
well, it’s because this is when we start getting close-ups in slapstick.8

What form will that take? The two major faces, much like two opposite ends of the spectrum, are
Chaplin and Keaton. Why are they different ends of the spectrum? Because one is—we’ve been
over it, I’m not going back over it, just refreshing your memory—one is affect as reflection, as
impassive reflection—affect’s first pole—[Pause] and the other is affect as intensive rise and
fall. And this time it’s Chaplin’s face. But, but everyone invents their own affective element;
during this second stage, among all of slapstick’s moonstruck creatures, the moonstruck
creatures of slapstick. Among the greatest of these moon-men are Laurel—we could call them
“lunatics,” each one a form of affectivity—Laurel’s way of being a lunatic, [Harry] Langdon’s
being a lunatic, constantly stuck in irresistible slumber and waking dreams. There, the affective
element is also very, very strong.9 And then you find the slapstick brand of lunacy in Harpo
Marx twice over, both in his insatiable impulses [Pause] and his heavenly serenity, i.e., the peace
of his harp-playing.

Alright, that would be our second stage. The affective element ends up governing sensorimotor
activities, sensorimotor activities which, from there, are purified, take on a finesse, a—I don’t
know quite how to describe it—a purity, a totally new purity compared to the first period of
slapstick. But really, just to say, we shouldn’t assume that it’s better; we should think of it, well,
as… [Deleuze doesn’t finish this sentence]

Then there’s a third stage. There’s a third stage that, of course, coincides with the talkie, but
[Pause] but, but, the talkie, right, made it possible, but the talkie didn’t do it alone; what talkies
did was make it possible, that’s all. And what do we find this time? I claimed that now it isn’t

                                                                                                    16

about introducing affect, of adding affective values to sensorimotricity, but about the
introduction of images, of mental images, really. There’s still sensorimotricity, but I mean, how
are actions and reactions framed? By mental images. What should we call these mental images?
Such mental images are images of logical relations, that is, actions and reactions, what remains
and subsists of sensorimotricity, but more as, literally, a “screen” passing over and under a whole
sequence—a mental frame, a frame made up of mental images.

And what’s the deal with these mental images, which act as and depict logical relations?
Obviously, they’ve been talked about. They’ve been discussed in two ways—which will help us
pin down a sort of third era of slapstick—they’re talked about, on the one hand, by Groucho
Marx and by Fields, by W. C. Fields, [as] logical relations, mental images whose essential
material—always, and across all disciplines—is nonsense, nonsense. [Pause] But also, in my
opinion, the extent to which Chaplin was absolutely fundamental to a particular approach to
talkies hasn’t been given the recognition it deserves. People are often content to say, they’re
content to leave it at: he took a long time to get there, he only took up [talkies] begrudgingly.
Once he did, he took such an unusual approach to them, one that, as I see it, has never been
duplicated since. In his case, it’s not like Fields or Groucho Marx, which might be called mental
images in the form of a nonsense argument—now, it’s a mental image in the form of discourse,
as a discursive image.

You’ll notice how Chaplin’s major talkies give us images where, ultimately, speech is totally
subordinated to a discursive form, i.e., backwards. Even when they’re short, Chaplin’s speeches
are intended to be and come across as provocative. You can always say that, oh, these are some
weak speeches, or whatnot. No, no, that’s missing the point—their value doesn’t reside in their
content. It isn’t the subject matter that matters; it’s the role of discourse as a new image, a new
type of image. Whereas the others… whereas Fields, Groucho Marx inaugurated the nonsense
image—it was really an image in Groucho Marx or Fields—Chaplin inaugurated the discursive
image in talkies, the discourse image. Like with the speech in Monsieur Verdoux [1947], what’s
revealed is really “an image,” a type of image—it’s Chaplin. Or the speech at the end of The
Great Dictator [1940], which it’d be completely idiotic to describe as vaguely humanist—it’s a
provocative speech. It’s provocative; it amounts to saying, Look—Look at yourselves, your
society, the state it’s in. It’s his speech in Limelight [1952], his big speech about life, which gives
us this image, where while Chaplin is talking, encouraging the young woman who’s lost—who’s
been paralyzed, to learn to use her legs again, he pantomimes the different stages of life—you
can clearly see that the discursive image is a truly cinematic one.

Well, it’s something, I think, completely new—in both cases, whether the nonsense image or
Chaplin’s discursive image—both cases allow us to define a third age of slapstick. This time, it’s
as if… See, in the second stage, the sensorimotor image is what—well, I’m complicating things,
but I like classifications so much that I can’t help it, it’s fun—sensorimotor images end up being
governed by affective, lunar elements. In the third stage, sensorimotor images are guided by
[Pause] mental images, that is, images of logical relationships, either in the form of nonsense or
in the form of speech.

What’s left, then? Right, that brings us to the post-war period. What happens? – If we find any
corroborating evidence… on the other hand… the more proof we find, the better our schema is

                                                                                                   17

likely to be – What happens? Well, what we find is that [Pause] as I went through the three
previous stages—I shouldn’t get ahead of myself—the less important sensorimotricity became. It
was there, of course, but its significance tends either to wane in favor of mental images—or in
Fields, there isn’t much sensorimotor activity at all; there are still big car chases, or what have
you. Ultimately, though, even the affective aspect of sensorimotricity tends to fade away. But it
was still there; sensorimotricity as such wasn’t in jeopardy yet.

What happens after the war? Is there still slapstick? The answer is yes. And again, it’s wonderful
when things happen at roughly the same time, because two great slapstick actors emerge: Jerry
Lewis in America, [Jacques] Tati in France—you’d have to check their exact dates, but Tati
came to film rather late, Jerry Lewis rather early; I don’t know the exact dates, but it doesn’t
matter—anyway, they do not influence each other, no influence whatsoever; more than
influence, they have something in common. What do they have in common? For the first time,
their slapstick is no longer sensorimotor, not the least bit sensorimotor. Slapstick characters are
confronted with purely audio-visual situations. What makes a situation funny, you might ask. It’s
obvious what’s funny about a sensorimotor situation: things get knocked over, right, and so on.
What could be funny about a purely audio-visual situation? It turns out to be just as funny as a
sensorimotor situation. [Pause] Of course, the character still moves, they have their own “bit”—
it won’t be the same type of bit, either with Lewis or with Tati. They wind up in pure sensori—
… purely audio-visual situations.

In the case of Tati, it’s about windows, glass. Glass, in particular, imposes a purely audio-visual
situation: showrooms, waiting rooms. We know Mr. Hulot is at his funniest when he’s in a
waiting room or showroom or looking through windows. What happens? [Pause] Needless to
say, Tati is part of what we’re talking about. You might say that Tati, as much as Ozu, as much
as Bresson, is someone who completely reinvented the problem of audio-visual relationships.
And a Tati soundtrack is nothing to sneeze at. Neither is its relationship with the images.

Well, what does he do? Well, he never does anything, right, he never does anything. There are
accidents—window accidents, yeah, there’s the guy in Playtime [1967], who’s so shocked by
Hulot’s silhouette that he doesn’t even see the window, even though he’s an officer who should
know better, and he smacks his nose and then is wearing this big bandage. Right, well, there’s
the distribution of sounds and noises in the waiting room in Playtime, the auto show fairgrounds
in Traffic [1971], the empty fairgrounds, the full fairgrounds, etc. I was saying that, that, uh, such
fairgrounds are as essential for Tati as amusement parks are for Fellini. And for similar reasons:
amusement parks offer Fellini purely audio-visual situations, just as Tati, in Traffic, finds purely
audio-visual situations in the exhibition fairgrounds, the waiting situation, the sound of chairs
falling apart, and so on, the sight, the sound—and what results? It’s quite strange.

Moving on to Jerry Lewis. Same thing. The slapstick character is in a situation where he doesn’t
know what to do. It’s something new with slapstick. In Jerry Lewis’s case, he does it differently
from Tati; he has absolutely no idea what to do. No matter what happens, he doesn’t know what
to do. As Americans say, and as they say in a Jerry Lewis film, he goes too far. What does it
mean that he goes too far? See, his mannerisms are constantly inhibited, the sounds he makes
are—they’re inarticulate, his mannerisms are inhibited, stymied. He’s always wanting to do
something and can’t manage to do it.10

                                                                                                     18

Right, but what happens? What happens is that, with this motor impotence—for both of them,
ultimately, their only “bit” is their motor impotence. What do they both do in their motor
impotence? They do not act—how do I put this?—Something takes over for the action they can
no longer do; something takes over for their action. What is it? Easy. What makes this modern
slapstick? Let’s call it a wave, a beam. They always have the misfortune of coming up against a
wave or beam, which takes over for their action, stirring up trouble, nudging their purely audiovisual situation over into catastrophe or disaster. [Pause] So much so that, in a way, all it takes
for the house, the electronic house, to go haywire is for Mr. Hulot to show up. The same for Jerry
Lewis: all he has to do is walk into a room, and, unwittingly, he’s smack dab on a beam spelling
out the collapse of the sensorimotor situation.

You see, what will this new kind of slapstick substitute for a sensorimotor scheme? Because we
might actually call—getting a bit fast and loose—but we should actually call it a slapstick of
electronics. And that the earlier forms of slapstick were those of the tool, the machine. I’m
simplifying things somewhat, but it’s so we can back up a little. The slapstick of electronics, the
slapstick of the electronic age—what is it? This is essentially what the electronic age is, right, it's
not the old machines. Like Chaplin’s machines, for example, right, the big assembly line in from
Modern Times [1936]; it goes crazy, it’s comical, it goes haywire. Trains in the Marx Brothers—
all the trains in earlier slapstick, I won’t even get into it, really, that’s slapstick of the machine.

Slapstick in the electronic age is very different, very different in that it’s not that machines go
haywire; on the contrary, it’s about their cold rationality, cold machinery is what’s responsible
for everything that goes wrong. So, we’ll say, sure, everyone’s familiar with the theme of
machines turning against us. We could always say that—it’s not wrong, but that’s not it. [Pause]
Consider Jerry Lewis, for example, all the electric machinery and the way he leans so heavily on
using his own techniques, since he uses video assist. But the interesting bit I want to highlight is
the lawnmower attack, when he’s attacked by robotic lawnmowers [It’s Only Money, 1962].
There are the things in the department store, the little, the little trolleys taking off in order, which
is the important part, in order to ruin the store [Who’s Minding the Store? 1963] It isn’t about
machines going haywire, right. And then the greatest bit in Jerry Lewis: that vacuum cleaner
sucking everything up, sucking up merchandise, customers’ clothing, paneling—if memory
serves—all along the floor, or the walls, right, this insatiable vacuum cleaner, right, this
electronic vacuum.

Here you can clearly make out a relationship: the sensorimotor situ—… the purely audio-visual
situation of the slapstick character, a situation that doesn’t extend into movement. He’s there in
the waiting room. What’s going to stand in for his failure to move? He always crosses a beam; he
always steps through a beam of energy. Quite different from the old days, the industrial age, the
age of machines. In the machine age, to one extent or another you had to act as the lever, you had
to be a source of energy; it has to be put on a beam of energy. That’s the difference between
older and more modern dances: you have to ride a wave. The artistry of Jerry Lewis, much like
Tati, fundamentally comes down to riding a wave, [Pause] that is, I could sum it up by simply
saying: sensorimotor situations are replaced by sets.

                                                                                                    19

Why? Because a set precisely what a purely audio-visual situation is. There’s no longer a
sensorimotor situation, there’s only a set. The showroom is a set, the waiting room is a set, the
house in Ladies Man [1961]—Jerry Lewis, you know, it’s still a well-known house, a house in
cross-section—the house with the girls, seen in cross-section: a set, purely a set. It’s why Jerry
Lewis is so taken with musicals, since they deal solely with audio-visual situations, with sets,
though what’s substituted for action is completely different: dance. [Pause] Well, here we have
slapstick using purely audio-visual situations, then, right, a set that doesn’t afford action. Instead
of sensorimotor situations, we have décor, and what do we have instead of action? We have
beams of energy pulling the character along, taking them away—if necessary, causing them to
swarm and multiply.

Hulots swarming everywhere—you know, especially in later Tati films, there are Hulots all over
the place—he suddenly makes them swarm, makes them briefly collide with other characters,
joining up with a character and then splitting up with them. In other words, sets replace
sensorimotor situations, and what replaces action? Something like the “back-and-forth.” [Pause]
One of the loveliest things about Jerry Lewis, and about Tati—in completely different ways—
you get this back-and-forth, i.e., characters run into each other, clump together, and then split.
It’s some really great filmmaking.

Well, for those who remember My Uncle, My Uncle has one of the most beautiful scenes: the
little steppingstones, those steppingstones, which lead to this wild kerfuffle. You have to walk on
the steppingstones, not the grass, and so there’s this hilarious steppingstone ballet, where tall,
clumsy Hulot reaches out for somebody, but they’re stuck on the same little stone. They’re hit
with the same beam. The characters clump together, and then it’s like one of them barely
manages to get off the beam. That’s always how it goes. And in Jerry Lewis—it’s the greatest—
there are clusters of people, bumping into each other at one moment and then separating. Then
there’s the swarming, the notorious swarming—with Mr. Hulot, there are all sorts of Hulots
swarming around—in Traffic, for example, there are Hulots everywhere, but even in Playtime,
it’s swarming with Hulots. In Jerry Lewis too, there’s a proliferation of uncles, a rather bizarre
proliferation-reabsorption in Three on a Couch [1966], etc.

This is what I mean when I say no more sensorimotor situation, no more motor situation, nothing
but sets; no more action, nothing but a back-and-forth. Only it turns out this new formula—what
I’d call the electronic approach of the fourth period of slapstick, using sets and energy beams, or
sets and back-and-forth’s—there’s a sort of complementarity, a sort of agreement that’s rather…
And I believe this is the slapstick of our age because it is, that’s really how it is. As basically one
last piece of evidence, on these lines, we see that post-war slapstick—and Jesus, this isn’t to say
it basically makes the three earlier forms of slapstick obsolete; just as there have been different
periods before, right, there will be further periods still, we’re still waiting for the next one—at
any rate, what we can say is that these images, again, these images—coming back to the subject
at hand—what is a set? Well, it’s a description that denies its object’s independence—harking
back to what we discussed at the start of the year—a pure description, i.e., a description that
replaces its object. That’s what a set is, a set as such; it’s a purely audio-visual situation. It no
longer affords action; it’s slapstick without action, slapstick using energy beams and a back-andforth. The beam of energy will not yield any action between characters; it will build up a backand-forth where characters meet, fuse, separate.

                                                                                                 20

While the energy beam still—think of the wonderful scenes in My Uncle, where there’s the maid
who doesn’t want to trigger the motion detector because it causes cancer, and so on, with the
two poor, the poor idiots locked in their house and can’t get out of the garage, or whatever—it’s
not simply an electronic comedy due to its subject matter; it’s an electronic comedy because it’s
the comedy of our day, and because that’s how we live.

How come we don’t believe in action anymore? It’s not that we no longer believe in action, but
that this is what our experience is like. We don’t experience action anymore, our lives are filled
with this back-and-forth, with beams, with waves. What we call “low-frequency waves.” Jerry
Lewis films are—it’s an undulating comedy, an undulating slapstick, and not… it’s no longer an
action slapstick. Jerry Lewis and Tati are undulatory slapstick. Their bits themselves, as it
happens, are low-amplitude; it’s a low-frequency wave. As soon as they appear, they manage to
get mixed up… It’s exactly like Monsieur Hulot’s Holiday [1953]: he opens the door, and he lets
in a big wave, the energy beam of the storm and the wind. That’s what this new form of slapstick
is all about. Yet, somehow, we laugh harder than ever before. You don’t appear to be laughing,
[Laughter] but you know, we’re laughing, not more than ever before, no, but as much as we ever
have, right?

I guess, if you want to understand what I mean, picture in your mind: Hulot enters his little beach
hotel, right, where there are all these people, some writing, others doing whatever. He opens the
door—wham! You might say that was already a thing. Perhaps. There’s the famous storm in
Buster Keaton [Steamboat Bill Jr, 1928], in the form of the power of nature; that’s very different.
It’s still slapstick, but it’s an action slapstick, it’s an example of sensorimotor slapstick. Here?
Not at all, not one bit.

I say this is what our lives are like, you know, we all experience things this way. Our problem is
that we are too tired, we are never too tired. But our age has made us tired, everything we hear
makes us tired, and so on. It wears you out so much that we’ve changed, we’re no longer active,
we’ve sort of turned into watchers or seers. And I don’t think our lack of action is because we’ve
become—speaking for myself, too—because we’ve become complete morons, that’s settled,
right, we should be committed, like Godard in First Name: Carmen [1983], [Laughter] it’s
wonderful how we get this way of knocking on wood. [We hear Deleuze knocking on something]
We are seers. There’s no opposition here, they aren’t mutually exclusive. Beckett is a seer, and
he has to knock on his head because he isn’t sure he exists. How come? Because he doesn’t act.
There’s no action. If we cannot act, does that mean we don’t care about anything? About
nothing, nothing at all—and it might even be this visionary side of us, as kind of like seers, that
actually leads me to suggest that it offers a new form of politics.

Right, so we’re seers, we’re in situations—think, how do we spend the best years of our lives? In
waiting rooms, right? What is there to do in a waiting room? It’s a purely audio-visual situation,
right? Waiting to hear our number, we think ah, well, it’s just like the situations we find in Tati.
And what do we do then, what do we do? Well, we’re no longer an energy source. To act is to be
an energy source, or to use an energy source. [Pause] We aren’t one any longer. Our problem is
being caught in beams of energy.

                                                                                                21

Then, as we hear from experts, consider new dance moves. Dance moves which are no longer
sources, no longer produce energy. Supposedly, then, we’ve gotten lazy, but that’s not it; we
haven’t gotten lazy, nor have we… What we’ve become is the result of our age. We’re no lazier
than before. But we’re no longer an energy source. It isn’t our fault. We’ve lost our energy
sources. [Airplane noise] They no longer fit us. Even a train, an adequate energy source for us,
which made the industrial age famous, but now we’re in an undulatory age. But what is action?
We’ve stopped acting, sure, but then what do we do? We’re caught in a beam, a low-frequency
wave. That’s what modern sports are about. The bicycle is so old-fashioned, you know; bicycles
produce energy. Boxing produces energy. Those kinds of sports belong to the industrial age. But
the sports that seem to fascinate people today come down to riding a beam of energy, right, hang
gliding, aquaplaning—they have nothing to do with producing energy. It’s about catching the
beam at the right time.

So, with Jerry Lewis and Tati, they’re caught in a beam headed toward catastrophe from the
beginning. That is, they’re on a set, a purely audio-visual situation; they’re screwed by a beam of
energy, an energy beam that will ruin the set. Right, Jerry Lewis’s shenanigans, the energy beam
of electric lawnmowers, the energy beam of the insatiable vacuum cleaner, the energy beam of
little trolleys. None of it involves a machine in control; it doesn’t go that far. It corresponds
precisely to how people are today, how we act today. That’s the electronic age.

What’s emerged, then, is clearly a different kind of slapstick, a powerful one, that rediscovers
precisely… One of the earliest essays on Tati, one of the first good essays on Tati, was titled
“Mr. Hulot and Time,” an essay by Bazin, André Bazin. 11 He tried to show how this form of
slapstick—which he still had trouble pinning down, since Monsieur Hulot’s Holiday was one of
Tati’s first films—how, though he had trouble defining it, something essential about this
approach to slapstick had to do with time, and it was something new. We’d be able to say, yes, if
you take Tati or Jerry Lewis [Pause; Deleuze goes to the board] the thing about their situations,
their purely audio-visual situations, leading to a direct time-image, to new ways of relating the
image’s elements, its audio and visual elements, its soundtrack, etc., and to new camera
functions: we get all three. There, that will again be a sort of slapstick that sacrifices the
movement-image or only hangs on to the movement-image’s residual effects, i.e., the guy caught
in beams, etc., pulling away from any schema, no longer governed by any sensorimotor scheme,
leading us to our three new types of signs. [Pause]

Does that make sense? As a result, everywhere we’d find… thus, I argue that what’s
revolutionary is the overturning of the relationship between movement and time; a consequence
of this revolution was the development of chronosigns, lectosigns, and noosigns. They form a
group. – I promised we’d take a short break for our smokers, and then I’ll pick back up and
attempt to delve into the second aspect of the image. [Interruption of the recording] [2:03:22]

… See, we’re moving on to a different turn of events, and it’s the same thing, only it happens in
a very different context; by no means does it follow the same rhythm, and when you get right
down to it, what we’d need—you won’t have any trouble—is for us to forget all that, as we
discover it a second time around, this time in philosophy. Philosophy, then, has slower rhythms
than cinema. It’s driven by powerful rhythms belonging to the Earth, and no longer those of a
rolling camera. [Deleuze laughs; Pause] Good.

                                                                                               22

And suppose we start there, what will we find? We get what came before, what happened before.
Once upon a time… Well, once upon a time, time appeared to be subordinated to movement, and
I might say, subordinated to the movement-image. Why can I say that it was subordinated to the
movement-image? Because what the folks I have in mind referred to as “phenomena” [Pause]—
i.e., that which becomes present, that which is shown, images—were specifically defined in
terms of movement. That which appears to us is movement, hence, it really is a movementimage. And so, time was derived from movement-images. Through what means is it derived
from movement-images? An immense machine, an immense montage you might call the
planetarium. What a wonderful sort of time! You could have guessed that this was the time of the
Greeks. [Pause] The only thing that came [Pause] from the movement-image, via a vast cosmic
machine, was an indirect image of time. [Interruption of the recording] [2:06:25]

Part 3

… in such a way as to give an indirect image of time, this movement-image, suddenly—not
suddenly—here and there, a truly scandalous feature starts cropping up: aberrations in
movement, aberrations in movement. And these aberrations in movement were a thread to the
world. [Pause] They threatened to topple it over into time, into a liberated time, time which no
longer depends on movement. [Pause] If it’s true that time was an indirect image derived from
movement-images or from phenomena, it’s also the case that these movement-images or
phenomena harbored aberrations which risked plunging us into a fathomless, [Pause] unruly
time, [Pause] since it would no longer be governed by movement. Such aberrations in movement
were what heralded this sort of time. [Pause] That being said, we shouldn’t take the Greeks for
children. Right?

And what is it?—I’m going fast because…—what is it? At a certain level, what’s going on?
Well, [Pause] there’s this constant refrain: time is what measures or numbers movement, as
we’ve seen, or it’s an interval of movement, we saw. We already covered that a lot last year—so
I won’t get back into these, I’ll take them as granted—some define time as an interval of motion;
others claim it’s how we measure or number movement. At bottom, they all have something in
common. They make time something that depends on movement, or they make time dependent
upon the movement-image, such that time can only be an indirect image of time.12

But how do we define movement, then? Because it’s a bit messy if we say that time measures
any movement whatsoever. Because, as one Greek will later say, it’s one of two things: either the
time measuring movement is proper to that movement, to this movement and not some other
movement, and so there will be as many times as there are movements. Or else time is the
measure for any movement, whatever it may be, at which point we run into the same problem as
we do with quantity or number, regarding what number measures—where I can say “ten,” but
“ten” can just as well mean ten apples or ten chairs or ten people; it’s an abstraction. Our only
solution, the only clear way to get around this difficulty would be for there to be a movement of
all movement. If there is a movement of all movement, [Pause] then yeah, I can say that time is
what numbers movement. [Pause] But easier said than done—what will it take? We’ll need very
advanced astronomy. [Pause]

                                                                                                   23

You find such high-level astronomy, for example, in Plato’s Timaeus. Grossly over-simplifying
it, this is how I’d paraphrase it: the earth is there in the center, immobile, and there’s an outer
sphere turning in one direction along an axis. This outer sphere is called “the fixed sphere”
because it carries the stars. And between the earth and the sphere of fixed stars, [Pause] there are
[Pause] seven spheres [Pause] which turn in the opposite direction than that of the fixed sphere,
and which are moreover infinitely more complicated, moving on various axes. Each of these
spheres holds one of the seven planets, right. [Pause] Follow me so far?

It’s incredibly complex; it’s an incredibly complex astronomy marshalling all of Greek
mathematics, all Greek geometry, marshalling the equivalent of projective geometry—extremely
complex, really. You’ll see if you look read through these parts of the Timaeus. All the Timaeus
does is gather up all sorts of Greek theories.13

What is the movement of all movement? [Pause] Well, it’s their least common multiple, [Pause]
the movement formed by the whole of these spheres [Pause] insofar as they begin from a certain
position with respect to the sphere of the fixed stars [Pause] and ultimately return to the point
where the seven wandering planets have the same position with respect to the fixed stars. In
other words, when… do you get it? That’s the Great Year, the astronomical eternal return.
Suffice it to say, when Nietzsche talks about the eternal return, this had absolutely nothing to do
with it, since, well, he’d have had to be an ignorant fool—and Nietzsche was neither—he
wouldn’t have pitched this piece of ancient Greek astronomy as a particularly new idea. So,
that’s a non-starter, he means something else.

But then, if you see what I’m getting at, this is the movement of movements: when all seven
bodies, the seven planets, have returned to the same position in relation to the fixed stars, each
lying, again, on a sphere rotating on its axis, etc., at a certain speed—their common multiple is
the Great Year. They say, there, that’s time; I could even say, it’s time in its entirety. Time, as a
whole, numbers the movement of all astronomical movement. [Pause] Well. I have no desire to
develop that any further, and I believe it’s been worked out a thousand times over by a specialist
on Greek and medieval physics named [Pierre] Duhem. For those interested in digging further
into Greek astronomy, his books are long but fascinating, quite interesting, but it becomes clear
you have to know a lot of math—more than I do, at any rate—to follow along.14

Right, then, why do I bring it up? What interests me is that these Greeks, right, they can tell,
they’re the first to realize that that doesn’t just happen by itself. That is to say, everywhere you
look, movement presents aberrations that cast doubt on the possibility of measuring it with time.
And these errors, these aberrations are really what I’d like us to home in on. It’s not this business
about the great circuit and its astronomical movement, about the great planetarium—I’ll take that
as a given, sure. Hold on to this conceit of a sort of perfect harmony, one formed over millennia,
the Great Year. They have ways of calculating it; some folks go so far as to say, about this Great
Year, right, that it takes more than ten thousand years for the spheres to reach the same position
compared to the year [sic] of the fixed stars. Well, that’s all well and good, but what I’m
interested in are the anomalies, the aberrations. Here’s one that shows up right away.

The first aberration is what I’d call a mathematical aberration in movement. [Pause] It’s not hard
to see; it’s that the seven globes, the seven spheres, can only line back up in the same position

                                                                                                 24

with respect to the sphere of the fixed stars on one condition: when their multiple relationships,
their relationships with each other and with the sphere of the fixed stars, are so-called “rational”
relationships. Follow me so far? What do we mean by rational relationships? Still with me? Feels
like a trick question. They’re relationships capable of being expressed as a whole number or
fraction. [Pause]

Suppose that an astronomical relation, or some such ratios, [Pause] can only be irrationally
expressed, like the square root of two. [Pause] What then? If they’re expressed as irrational
numbers, everything’s screwed, it’s all ruined. We’re back to the irreducibility of movements.
The Great Year won’t come back unless… But Greek mathematicians were familiar with these
incredibly mysterious irrational numbers, i.e., numbers expressed neither as integers nor as
fractions, and they had discovered them in the simplest way: this whole business with
diagonals… no, triangles, [Pause] right? And it shook up, it shook up Greek mathematics. Here
we find an aberration in movement, where the relationships between speed and position are
expressed irrationally.

Perhaps one could compensate for irrationals? But, at which point, it explains why the
planetarium is… why we shouldn’t rush to put stupid ideas in the Greeks’ mouths. In particular,
we shouldn’t hastily assume they believed the earth was immobile, and that things revolved
around the earth. Because you can already find so-called “heliocentric” systems—at least in
part—among the Greeks, where the planets revolve around the sun. And how are there partially
heliocentric systems in this great planetarium? There have to be. Again, none of the globes have
the same mobility, the same speed, the same rotation axis. So, it gets complicated; sometimes it’s
necessary to inject somewhat heliocentric systems in order to neutralize irrational relationships.
In short, preserving the idea that time measures motion immediately comes up against
mathematical anomalies in physical movement. [Pause]

And second of all, there will be physical anomalies, and the Greeks are fully aware of it. How
come? The closest planet to us is the Moon, as everyone knows; [Pause] the sphere nearest to the
Earth’s is the one carrying the Moon. [Pause] What is there between us and the Moon? The
Greeks have such a poetic name for it, for our world, our atmosphere, where we all live out our
lives: “the sublunary world.” We are “sublunary creatures.” It’s hard to think of yourself the
same way when you’re told that I’m not sublunary. [Laughter] So, there. Alright, then. [Pause]

Does the sublunary world correspond to what I might call—I’m slipping in this word because it’s
used—to the “metaschematism” of the great planetarium? In Leibniz, again, you find
“metaschematismus.” [Pause] See, it’s the great scheme; the great celestial scheme, the great
movement driving all the globes, including the moon, in different directions, etc. But do we
sublunary creatures and our Earth, conform to laws commensurate with those governing the
superlunary world? Or does our sublunar domain enjoy a degree of independence, causing its
disharmony, its anomaly, [Pause] which is the second aberration in movement: in the sublunar
world, movement is no longer that of rotation. [Pause]

There are physical aberrations in movement. This time, it’s no longer the mathematical
aberration of irrational relationships, but the physical aberration of movement that doesn’t
conform to the meta-schematism, that may well conform to sublunary patterns, [Pause] obeys

                                                                                                   25

them, doesn’t obey them, more or less obeys them. And the Greeks actually went quite far with
this. Never do the planets—save for some mystics, and there were Greek mystics—the planets
never directly determine… the course and motion of planets do not determine the course of the
world. [Pause] Why? Because the course of the planets constitutes celestial movement, right.
There is time as the measure of celestial movement, in all its complexity. That, then, is the
purview of the meta-schematism. [Pause] But in our sublunar atmosphere, in our sublunar
activity, if our movements respond to celestial influences, such influence can only be indirect
and extremely convoluted. [Pause]

The second aberration: movement’s physical aberration. Doesn’t that also offer a glimpse of time
in its pure state, either freed from movement, or, or else linked to a completely different
movement, for which it would no longer serve as a measure? What would it be, then, for
movement? [Pause] And here’s where Aristotle comes in, and I’d like to end here so that you
can think more on it, so you have something to reflect on, maybe. Aristotle says something rather
beautiful. It’s like Aristotle’s chain of being. Here’s what Aristotle tells us. He says [Pause]:
beings are forms. Yeah, sure, fine, whatever—Greeks were always saying things like that, that
beings were forms.

But okay, [Pause] what is form? It’s what primarily belongs to a being. Form is what primarily
pertains to a being. For example, [Pause] “having horns,” for what reason? —He’s right, there’s
no denying him here—“having horns” is the form of the herbivore. But if you show me a
hornless herbivore, Aristotle has an explanation for that. Obviously, horns might not have
developed, he demonstrates, and it’s irrefutable, the sort of thing that will fully remain into 19th
century natural history. The herbivore—not all herbivores, right—vertebrates, at any rate, you
know what I mean—its form is “having horns.” What is the form of the triangle? What primarily
belongs to it. Like the herbivore and “having horns,” what primarily pertains to triangles? What
primarily pertains to the triangle is its being three straight lines enclosing a space.

Well, see, that’s why I’m always saying—to do philosophy, there are things you have to know;
you have to… some things you have to know by heart, just like how mathematics implies a base
knowledge. If you don’t know it, you’ll be fine for the most part, but there are some things that
will give you trouble. On the other hand, we shouldn’t confuse form and essential properties—
form or essence on the one hand, essential properties on the other. Form or essence is what
primarily pertains to a subject, right, and its essential properties are what apply to the subject
universally. That’s already a strong distinction, rather clever, eh? It’s what universally applies to
the subject.

But, I hear you say, form or essence does apply to its subject universally: all triangles are built
with three straight lines—sure, sure, what primarily belongs to the subject universally applies,
but not the other way around. There are things that universally apply but do not primarily apply,
that apply by consequence. They derive from its essence or form, but they are not essences or
forms; they are modifications—pathai, as the Greeks say, pathai. Okay, what’s that? Well,
having forms [sic] is the herbivore’s essence, but having a third stomach is the property that
follows as a result, and it universally applies to the subject. All horned herbivores have a third
stomach or should have one; you just have to look for it. Still with me? All triangles have angles
that add up to two right angles. It’s an essential property following from their essence. Right?

                                                                                                        26

Now you have a criterion for your chain of beings. For each type of being, you’ll ask: in what
regard is its essence more or less directly, more or less distantly tied to its essential properties?
That is, in what ways do its essential properties stem from its essence? They always do, but in
what ways, through what means?

First, let’s say its essence directly leads to its essential properties. [Pause] These are pure forms.
[Pause] There is no matter. Pure forms without matter—I’m simplifying things—along the lines
of the prime mover, what Aristotle calls the prime mover, and everything the prime mover
implies. [Pause] So here, the essential properties of pure forms stem directly from said forms.

So, here soon I’d like to call it a day; I’ll leave it there so we can pick up next time; this is where
we’ll pick back up.

Second, suppose there’s a gap. You need some intermediary to get from essence to essential
properties, from form to essential properties. In that case, you’d say that such forms imply
matter, and that the link between form and essential properties doesn’t happen by itself but calls
on some external cause. Example: heavenly bodies. [Pause] Heavenly bodies are forms; their
essential property is their movement, a circular movement—as we saw, there is… for astronomy,
etc.—it’s a circular movement. Their only movement is a local, circular motion.

Only, there must be a cause; the prime mover is this cause, otherwise the essential property of
circular, local motion wouldn’t flow from these bodies. Therefore, they have matter, a uniquely
local matter. Local matter is a body which undergoes no other change than that of position—
thus, an unalterable body that does nothing but move. [Pause] You see? [Pause] But they’re still
rather close. I mean, their essential properties are still rather close to their essence; the only, their
only intermediary is their mover, the prime mover. But since they have an intermediary, they
have matter—but it’s the purest sort of matter, a purely local matter. They have no other matter.

Taking it a step further, it’s much more complicated with sublunar physical phenomena. Their
essential properties are tied to their essence, but they’re linked by causes infinitely more complex
than the prime mover. At the same time, these superlunary forms have matter, but that’s not
enough. This matter is not a local matter, in that the modification of its forms, its essential
property or properties, does not come down to local, even rectilinear movement. They have a
local motion and local matter, but they are also subject to corruption and generation. They are
subject to alteration, i.e., they have, if I may, a much heavier sort of matter, while at the same
time they refer to causes as intermediaries between their essence and their properties.

Understand that, on each rung of this hierarchy, at each turn, there will be aberrant movements in
relation, in relation to the level, to the level above. Movement will literally constantly be aberrant
with respect to the earlier model. Hence the reign in the superlunary world, the reign of what he
calls the “automaton,” what he calls “chance,” what he calls “contingency,” etc. Which, which
will introduce physical anomalies all over the place. That’s not all. There will be psycho-political
anomalies, [Pause] because the soul also has movements. There are movements of the soul; there
are movements of the city. There will also be economic, economic anomalies. So, the Greek
world is turned around, and throughout the great planetarium of the cosmic image, the

                                                                                                                    27

astronomical movement-image, measured by time, at every stage we find aberrations in
movement that stir up trouble. Where do these aberrations in movement take us?

Well, there we are, right? We’ll have to sort it all out next time, then, before our break, so we’ll
go pretty quickly. [End of the session] [2:39:22]

Notes
  Situations optiques et sonores pures. Often translated as “pure optical and sound situations.”
  See Sessions 17 and 18 of the Cinema seminar I (May 4 and 11, 1982). As if anticipating the English reader,
Deleuze points out the two senses of the word, “ballad,” in French. See Tomlinson and Galeta’s translation notes in
The Time-Image, p. xvii.
  The film might be Early Summer (1951)
  A faux-raccord, in English, is sometimes translated as “jump cut,” but this buries the “false” [faux] so pertinent to
Deleuze’s aims. In other Deleuze translations, the reader may find it put as “false continuity,” which is apt, given
Dreyer’s engagement with the American-forward style of continuity editing. A “mismatch cut” communicates that a
faux-raccord is a deliberately “off” instance of the “match cuts” that are the bread-and-butter of continuity editing.
  See the previous session for this distinction; see The Time-Image, p. 41, where Deleuze refers to Lapoujade
without citing the date for Issue 45 of L’Arc (1971).
  On the legible image, see The Time-Image, pp. 23-24, 229-234, and especially 244-247.
  Deleuze had already discussed slapstick in detail; see especially Sessions 13, 15, and 18 of the Cinema seminar I
(March 16, April 20, and May 11, 1982), Session 5 of Cinema seminar II (December 14, 1982), as well as the
previous session. See also The Movement-Image, Chapters 9, 10, and 11, and The Time-Image, pp. 64-67.
  On the face and affect, see Sessions 9, 10, and 11 of the Cinema seminar I (February 2 and 23, March 2, 1982); see
also The Movement-Image, Chapters 6, 7 and 8.
  Deleuze offers these perspectives in The Time-Image, p. 64.
   On “going too far” and the figure of the “loser” in Lewis, see The Time-Image, pp. 65-66.
   From What is Cinema? (Paris: Cerf, 1976)
   On the interval, see Sessions 13 to 19 from the Cinema seminar II, starting March 3, 1983.
   See also Session 13, from the seminar on Leibniz and the Baroque, for an extended treatment of the Timaeus
(March 17, 1987).
   For a similar account of the Great Year, see Session 14 of the Cinema seminar II (March 15, 1983).