1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Foucault, 1985-1986

Part III: Subjectification

Lecture 22, 06 May 1986

Transcribed by Annabelle Dufourcq

Translated by Melissa McMahon; time stamp and additional revisions, Charles J. Stivale

Part 1

This is where we were, you remember… with a question specific to Foucault: what does this
apparent return to the Greeks represented by the last books of Foucault mean? We went via a
more general question first, which was: well yes, how does Foucault fit into the tradition or
traditions that ask the question “Why the Greeks?”, which is to say, “Why was philosophy born
in Greece, and is its relationship with Greece one that can be articulated?” Articulated how? Is
all this… Is this a well formulated question? I have no idea, I have no idea. Should it be
formulated in that way? Is it appropriate to say that, yes, the Greeks had a foundational role in
relation to philosophy? I don’t know, myself. But we take it as it is. We take it as it is, because it
is where our subject leads us and because it is Foucault’s thought we are concerned with.

Now what I wanted to say last time, very quickly, was that the question seemed to me to have
arisen with German Romanticism, but that since the nineteenth century this question, “why
philosophy and the Greeks?”, has received three types of response which are quite different and
yet linked, complementary, much more complementary than contradictory. One concerns... one
is philosophical and concerns the revelation of being. I am putting it in very general terms, very
vague terms and very vague as a matter of necessity because it covers very different authors. I’m
saying: it seems to me that in German philosophy, from Hegel to Heidegger, the response we are
given in relation to this problem is: yes, being revealed itself in Greece. What bothers me is the
slightly… well, it’s not, it’s not… it’s not a drawback, but the slightly Christian side of this… of
such a response. I mean: they say “Being revealed itself in Greece” a bit like... where in other
places people say that God became man in such or such a place. The unity of the singularity and
the universal… That’s why I say: perhaps, in the end, the problem is not well formulated. But,
well, once again, that’s not our business. Yes, being revealed itself in Greece, all right. We saw
this, very quickly.

And what does that amount to saying? Well, if I go back to Hegel’s formulation, very quickly: in
what form does being reveal itself in Greece? Well, it reveals itself immediately. The immediate
revelation of being happens in Greece. In what form? Being appears there as, properly speaking,
the universal of objects. And that’s the beginning of a long story, which is history itself, which is
to say the history of philosophy. Because next comes a mediation or a – the word here is

                                                                                                       2

important for me – a subjectification, already. The second moment is a subjectification of being
or, if you prefer, already, if we highlight the notions that are important for us, being folds back
onto [se replie sur] the subject, who represents both the object to itself and itself to itself. This is
the second moment, no longer the immediate, but the moment of reflection, which no longer
bears the mark of the Greeks, but of Descartes: I think therefore I am. Being folds back onto the
subject who represents itself to itself and the object to itself. And then, in a third moment, which
is the moment of the absolute – I don’t need to tell you how much I am simplifying things, but
the three moments are definitely, are very clearly differentiated by Hegel in his course on the
history of philosophy – this time it is the movement of the subjectivity of the subject, the
movement of subjectivity which deploys itself in being, which is to say that, in thinking itself,
thinks being. And this is the properly Hegelian moment with which Hegel thinks he has
completed philosophy.

But let’s be clear, I am saying – but I don’t have time here and it really wouldn’t be my area – I
understand that Heidegger is very different to Hegel. I am saying that the Heideggerian
conception of the relationship of philosophy with the Greeks nevertheless grew out of that
particular soil, namely Greece as the place of the revelation of being. The great difference
between Heidegger and Hegel is the way the two authors conceive the revelation of being. But
the fact that there is a revelation of being in Greece and the start of a movement of
subjectification as the fold of being, that is a theme with Heidegger’s name on it just as much as,
in a certain way, it has Hegel’s name already on it. So, this first philosophical current in relation
to the question of the relationship of philosophy with Greece could be expressed as: yes, the
revelation of being takes place in Greece, and that’s what we call philosophy.

And then there is a second response, a second type of response, which we won’t call a
philosophical response anymore, which is much more of a historical response. And at the same
time, I would like you to have a sense of how unfair it is… there is something unfair in the extent
to which the historians, I was saying, neglect the philosophical response, as though it had nothing
to offer them, whereas in my opinion their research would not have existed without the mode of
questioning that was in the first place philosophical. Because what do the historians tell us? It is
no longer a matter of saying “Yes, being reveals itself in Greece,” that is unintelligible to them,
that is… that is pure and simple metaphysics. On the other hand, on the positive side, they say
that there is an organization of the cosmological and social space in Greece that implies a new
mode of thought, which the Greeks will call philosophy. So, the response is no longer: being
reveals itself in Greece, but: a new cosmic and social space appears or is organized in Greece.

What does that mean? I’ll go very quickly and say that it is a bit like the Hegel-Heidegger
situation just now – I myself believe that the first great Greek historians in Germany in the
nineteenth century emphasized this aspect of the new space. You can sense it straight away: it is
the space of the city. And we can follow the traces from the nineteenth-century history of
antiquity to the school... to the current French school I was referring to, three particularly
important names in this orientation, namely [Jean-Pierre] Vernant, [Marcel] Détienne and
[Pierre] Vidal-Naquet, who analyzed this new cosmic and social space which made a new mode
of thought possible, called philosophy.

                                                                                                      3

But what was there before? Before, there was a thought… I am summarizing, I am very quickly
summarizing, those of you who are interested should go and look at the texts. Let’s say it was a
“magico-religious” thought, as it is often called. A magico-religious thought which corresponded
to what? Which corresponded to, let’s say, the great imperial formations. Even in Greece,
Mycenae, imperial Mycenae. These great imperial formations, which we have quite substantial
information about, you’ll see all of that anyway. So, for example Vernant asks: how is this type
of thought – let’s call it pre-philosophical thought – defined? This type of magico-religious
thought. Others would say “poetic,” the thought expressed in poetry. It is expressed by the
affirmation of a gap. The affirmation of a gap between what and what? A gap between two
meanings of the word “first.” What is first from the point of view of the beginning, or the
temporal point of view, and what is first from the point of view of sovereignty, from the point of
view of power.

This means something quite simple. You see: what is first from the temporal point of view is
chaos. In the beginning, there is chaos. And what is first from the point of view of sovereignty is
the sovereign god. It is Zeus. And what is magico-religious thought? It deals with everything that
is supposed to happen in the gap. It took time to tame chaos – why? Poetic language, or mantic
language, mantic in the sense of… or divinatory, if you prefer, tells of all of the battles between
the generations of gods, between the two extremes of chaos and the sovereign god, everything
that happened, the Titans, the battle of the Titans, how the Titans were vanquished, etcetera,
etcetera. How the generations of gods succeeded one another until the greatest god asserted
himself and imposed order on chaos at the same time as he triumphed over the other gods. So
much so that the world, in the poetic or pre-philosophical language, is presented as a hierarchy of
forces [puissances] struggling with each other, which fills in the distance between chaos and the
sovereign order.

This is to say, this is very important to me, because I’ll just say, when there is this idea all over
the place, when it comes up, an idea like “oh yes… archaic thought is the thought of the eternal
return,” it’s completely false, the idea that things come back, etc., it is so false. Once again, think
about what you may already know yourselves, but archaic thought, to my knowledge, never
invoked any kind of eternal return, it invoked the exact opposite, which is to say this succession
of divine generations to the point where a sovereign god assumes power, which is to say that
archaic thought has always invoked the succession of generations. And one of the last Greek
examples of this kind of thought is Hesiod. And what are its aims? It has two aims: to sing the
praises of sovereignty and how sovereignty came about, and, in light of that, to recall the great
feats of the warriors. And these are the two fundamental functions of archaic poetry.

But what happens in Greece, what does “philosophy is born” mean? First of all it means – and
this is how you recognize a philosopher, the first Greek philosopher, except of course several
already arrived at the same time – this is how you recognize a Greek philosopher: it is someone
who tells you, no, the universe has an immanent law of organization. What is first in the order of
time and first in the order of sovereignty is in a certain way the same thing and at the same time,
even if it takes time to emerge – it’s possible, all kinds of middle grounds are possible of course,
pre-philosophical thought will continue in philosophical thought. It’s possible to conceive of an
immanent law of organization of the universe that takes time to emerge. It is still the case that
it’s an immanent law of organization of the universe that is affirmed and not a chaos. Or, if you

                                                                                                        4

prefer, the earth in a position where it is balanced in the center of an already homogeneous space.
The earth balanced in the center of a homogeneous space. That is the signature of philosophy –
in what sense? Because it no longer needs a sovereign god to hold it up. The question “why
doesn’t the earth fall?” no longer exists. That was the magico-religious question: why doesn’t the
earth fall? If it is balanced in the center of an already homogeneous space, it has no reason to
fall. In other words, this is a way of saying that there is an immanent law of organization. You
see, what was affirmed as a gap, the gap has been completely [slapping sound] flattened, folded
[slapping sound]. That’s a certain manner of folding as well, to fold, fold down [slapping sound].
I fold the sovereign law onto [slapping sound] the earth itself. And at that moment philosophical
language begins.

But where did such a conception of the cosmos come from? It’s that at the same time there was
an evolution or even a mutation of the social space. The social space stops being pyramid-like,
with the point of sovereignty, the summit of sovereignty, and the tiers representing the
generations of gods who succeeded each other. There was a kind of flattening or folding inwards
in this case as well. What was it? It was a new social space defined by, to use the Greek word,
isonomia. And what was the great isonomia of the Greeks? It was that they posited a
homogeneous space, all parts of which were, in a certain way, symmetrical in relation to a center.
The center of a circle replaced the very different image of the summit of a pyramid. The summit
of a pyramid whose tiers represented the successive generations; now it was a matter, on the
contrary, of the center of a circle, in which all of the parts have become reversible and
symmetrical in relation to the center.

And what was that, once again? It was, firstly, the great constitution of Cleisthenes, which – this
is common knowledge and what I’m saying, once again, is extremely basic, I have to… I’m
obliged to go quickly, all I can say is that it’s not false… I’m ashamed, this is Dictionnaire
Larousse level, really – this is as if it has always been said, about replacing the gentilis-based
distribution,1 which is to say a distribution based on tribes or peoples [gentes], who were defined
according to how long they had been in existence, the pyramid image, the pyramid image of the
generations... replaced this so-called gentilis-based distribution with a territorial distribution –
the different territorial parts, the different parts of the territory, being symmetrical in relation to a
center. What is this center? The famous agora. The famous agora of the Greek city. Which is to
say the common meeting place. The idea of the common meeting place which is substituted for
the summit of the pyramid.

And no doubt people will say that this is Athenian democracy. And we will recall that Plato, the
philosopher par excellence, was violently hostile to this democracy. But everyone knows at the
same time that this is not an objection, because what is the true philosophical problem in Plato?
It is not at all a matter of going back to magico-religious language, to pre-philosophical language
or pre-philosophical thought, but about asking under what conditions isonomia – the need for
which he perfectly recognizes, because isonomia becomes the very model of justice, of the rule,
the rule of symmetry of isonomia, it can be translated as the rule of symmetry, equality or
proportion – the Platonic question is how can isonomia – which is to say, Cleisthenes’ ideal –
how can it be effectively realized, once we say that it is not and cannot be realized in Athenian
democracy?

                                                                                                      5

So, why can’t it be? Well, there, it doesn’t really matter… How does Plato… I’ll just say: Plato’s
response is that Cleisthenes’ ideal can only be realized, can only be put into effect, if we
reintroduce a strict hierarchy into the city, a hierarchy of the following type: where the leaders,
the rulers of the city, have no other profession than to rule, because it is the distinction between
professions, the distinction between occupations, that prevents Athenian democracy from
realizing the ideal of isonomia. So, a hierarchy must be restored, but not at all in order to go back
to magico-religious thought, just to… to arrange things so that the rulers are removed from any
professional activity apart from politics itself, which is to say so they are in relationships of
isonomia among themselves, in relation to each other. That doesn’t mean there aren’t certain
elements in Plato that draw on and reactivate a type of magico-religious thought, hence Plato’s
use of myth, in particular, but in a completely different context and with a completely different
aim.

But if we look, in fact… this is to say that Plato completely holds on to the Cleisthenian
conception of space, in fact, he just thinks that Athenian democracy is completely inadequate for
realizing this space in the city, this isonomic space. And more than that: that to do this it is
necessary to replace the symmetry of parts with equalities of proportion, in other words
relationships of analogy. So, the differences with… But this is to indicate that he belongs, that
Plato, even when he seems to completely distance himself or move away from this problem he
still, here as well, wholly belongs to the sphere of this problem. And it is very interesting if you
look into it, one of the origins – we can see then that there is a cosmic origin of this new
organization or conception of space, a civic origin of this new organization, and similarly I
would say that there is an origin that Détienne has analyzed very well in his book Les Maîtres de
vérité, analyzed very, very well, which is the warriors themselves.2 It’s that the warriors, for their
part, don’t just wage war. What do they do? Well, perhaps this space, this new Greek space was
born among the warriors. The warriors always had a special status, and what did this special
status consist in? A type of language that was unique to them, a manner of... [Interruption of the
recording] [28:17]

Part 2

... comes to the center, the one who has something to say to his warrior equals. And when he has
said what he has to say, he goes back to his place and another one who is his equal, equal in rank,
another chief, comes and speaks in turn. The word or booty is thus placed in the center. And all
of the parts are symmetrical in relation to this center, in effect, all of the warrior chiefs are peers,
equals. A new type of language is born there, a new type of thought, a social space, a circular
space defined by the symmetry of the parts in the relationship to a center. And should it be any
surprise that this space develops and becomes a civic space? It becomes a civic space at the same
time that the famous so-called “hoplite” reform takes place, which makes a soldier of the citizen
or a citizen of the soldier. So, you see, Cleisthenes’ reform, the hoplite reform, etcetera, the
organization of a new space takes place through datable and historically determinable reforms.

Georges Comtesse: May I offer a comment?

Deleuze: Yes?

                                                                                                    6

Comtesse: I’d like to point out that… [Inaudible comments at the start, concerning details of the
Greek civic organization] … citizens who were around a circle, at equal distance from a center, it
was at the center that [inaudible word] by someone called [inaudible term], and the difference of
this [inaudible term] with the other formulations of [inaudible word], is that for it equal law for
all in which citizens around a circle, at equal distance from the center, and that the disposition of
the figure of democracy, it’s that the center… in the center, there wasn’t anything, that is, there
was neither booty which varied [inaudible words], nor the chôra, to speak [inaudible word]. The
initial disposition of the [inaudible words], it’s that the disposition of the center is not a
[inaudible word] spot, but it’s a completely empty site, and thus the site, being absolutely empty,
can therefore be occupied by all, hence the idea of a complementarity, precisely evokes [several
inaudible words] of the empty site; it’s the idea of the agonia, the struggle for the center. And
it’s in the struggle for the center precisely that the Plato’s philosophical question intervenes,
[inaudible words] and what the selection is that the philosopher is going to make for those who
want, or don’t want, consider all that. That’s the comment I wanted to make.

Deleuze: Oh indeed... this is a very useful remark. And, in fact, but… it is certainly, it is even
precisely because the center is an empty place that it is where the booty is placed, in a
completely transitory way, and where the person who speaks comes to speak and all of that is
completely... And indeed, what you add about Plato is quite correct. So much so that, if you
grasp this distinction, this historiographical distinction, from a historical, historiographical point
of view, between the two: between the space we’ll call magico-religious, and the new space,
there is a whole story of alethes, aletheia, which is to say of truth. The mutation of magicoreligious truth into philosophical truth. And this is main subject of Détienne’s book, Les Maîtres
de vérité dans la Grèce archaïque: the evolution of this aletheia, and I told you about my
surprise last time that this book doesn’t once cite Heidegger, whereas it is difficult to see how
Heidegger’s contribution to this problem of aletheia for the Greeks would not be of considerable
value and something that could be useful even to historians, and in fact I have the strong
impression that Détienne certainly uses him. All right, but, well, we don’t have the time and most
importantly that’s not our subject. So, you see, then, the second direction was: yes, the cosmic
and social space is organized in Greece in such a way that philosophy is born, that a new type of
thought and discourse appears that is called philosophical. The friends – giving further support to
what Comtesse was saying – the society of friends is around the center, they are the ones around
the center. It is no longer the sages, who correspond to the image of the pyramid, it is the friends
of wisdom, who correspond to the image of the circle.

And I am saying that there is a third direction because – as one of you signaled to me last time –
it is clear that we cannot place Nietzsche on the side of the German philosophers... Because…
well in the first place he didn’t want to be. We have to take what he wanted into account,
because he himself asserted that there was a radical difference. So Nietzsche is not this…
Heidegger is the only one who thinks that Nietzsche thought that… the Greeks… bore witness to
the revelation of being, because Nietzsche poses the problem in a third way and, I also stress, one
that doesn’t contradict the two others, but it is a third path, a third path which perhaps has its
antecedents, I’m not saying that Nietzsche was its founder, he takes it to a very high level, at the
end of the nineteenth century… and it consists in a third type of response, no longer about
revealing being or organizing a cosmic and social space, but about producing, bringing out, a
new type of force.

                                                                                                      7

Here again, this can be reconciled very well with the historical hypothesis: a new type of force
will also be expressed in a new space, that goes without saying. Everything we have just said
about forces, about the pyramid-shaped organization of forces, etc. And if I try to say, yes, if I
try… Nietzsche’s texts on the Greeks are at once so varied, so beautiful… so ambiguous, so…
it’s very, very difficult, and I’m afraid it would take a whole session – and there’s no cause to –
to try to say what I think about that. I will just try to pick out a few points.

What Nietzsche says to us in the end is that the Greeks, as philosophers, the Greek philosophers
– what did they do? I think that one of the most constant themes in Nietzsche is: they invented
new possibilities of life. They made thought an art. That’s it. Note that here again, Hegel always
said that the immediate revelation of being is the beautiful, and the Greeks… and this was even
the theme… the criticism Hegel made of the Greeks: that the Greeks remained at the stage of the
beautiful. They apprehended being as beautiful and, according to Hegel, this is inadequate,
completely inadequate. And Nietzsche means something completely different, which
nevertheless has a kind of resonance. Nietzsche doesn’t say that they apprehend being as
beautiful, he says that they make existence an art and that, in so doing, they invent new
possibilities of life.

What does that mean? It means, no doubt, two things. That – and this is also a constantly
recurring theme – the philosopher, which is to say the Greek, is the one who affirms life. The
philosopher makes power [puissance] something that affirms life. It is a conversion of
sovereignty. Power no longer means power becoming an art, which means: it is no longer a will
to dominate. Pre-philosophical thought, for its part, conceived of power as a will to dominate,
that’s the problem of sovereignty. With the Greek philosopher, no, force is no longer a will to
dominate. Who wants… Nietzsche launches his great formula, the will to power. He adds:
who… who could call that a will to domination? It is not about wanting to dominate, not at all,
not at all. “Will to power” [volonté de puissance] never meant, for Nietzsche, at least in the way
he understood it, “ensure one’s domination,” but “affirm life.” It is a transformation of power.
You can see how that ties in very well with our historical perspective from just before, affirming
life and no longer judging life, as the sovereign god does. So much so that the philosopher, in so
far as he invents new possibilities of life, can only do this through the following operation: the
unity of all that lives. And when even Parmenides said being is – and here he agrees… being has
never meant anything else but the unity of what lives. So, breaking with the sovereign
conception of power is the first act of philosophy, in so far as it makes life an art, which is to say
in so far as it creates new possibilities of life.

And the second aspect is how… what are these possibilities of life? Establishing in oneself a
relationship between actions and reactions such that a maximum of action is produced.
Establishing in oneself a relationship between actions and reactions such that a maximum of
action is produced. And this time it is in opposition to the other aspect of magico-religious
thought, namely the conception of the feat of the warrior and of war. “Will to power” has
nothing to do with war. On the one hand, “will to power” has nothing to do with sovereignty, and
on the other hand, it has nothing to do with war – the two poles of magico-religious poetry that I
told you about just before, namely the problem of the sovereign god, the problem of the feat of
the warrior, which fall to the level of, yes, philosophy is the affirmation of a new form of life.

                                                                                                         8

And this new form of life consists, from the point of view of thought, of thinking the unity of
everything that lives.

What I am saying is particularly inadequate in relation to Nietzsche, but never mind, the
important thing is for you just to have the sense that there is a new emphasis. And just as I was
saying before about the nineteenth century to the most recent authors, I’ll come back now to my
real problem: why does Foucault focus on the Greeks in his final books? The response will take
some time, obviously, but I know that if he focuses on the Greeks, based on what we have just
said – he is very familiar with Heidegger, he is very familiar with the historians of Ancient
Greece – but he focuses on them from a point of view directly connected to Nietzsche’s. It is a
question of force [force]: if the Greeks invent philosophy, it is because they bring a new
conception of force, or they bring out a new type of force. In this respect I think, even when
you’re not aware of it, The Use of Pleasure derives from Nietzsche. Only… only while he poses
the problem in the same way as Nietzsche, I think his response is completely personal to him and
no longer at all a Nietzschean response, it is very different to Nietzsche’s.

And that’s what I would like to explain to you today, the way Foucault conceives the Greeks,
then, from this vitalist or dynamic point of view, once again, a new adventure of forces and
relationships between forces. Because remember, what was the relationship of forces in
Foucault? It was the object of the diagram. It was: all force is in a relationship with other forces
for each formation, in all social formations. All force is in a relationship with other forces,
whether it affects other forces or is affected by other forces, and both at the same time, there is
no force that does not affect other ones, there is no force that is not affected by other ones. So, it
is these relationships of force that are captured in a diagram. I am assuming that you remember
all of that. And I am asking: is there a Greek diagram?

If you recall, we saw this because it’s a question that came up in light of how rarely Foucault
uses the word diagram, in light of the way he defines the diagram in relation to disciplinary
societies, which is to say relatively modern ones. We asked ourselves, for our part, in the second
semester, we asked ourselves – or in the second term, I don’t remember any more – we said to
ourselves: alright, but can we talk about diagrams for all formations? And we said: well of
course, of course. Because the diagram is always the determination of the relationships of forces
that are effectuated in a social formation, that are realized, in effect, actualized in a social
formation. To the point where I am entitled to say that all social formations refer to a diagram,
because they actualize relationships between forces. I pose the question: is there a Greek
diagram? Yes, there is a Greek diagram, why wouldn’t there be? If there is a Greek formation,
there is a Greek diagram. What is new about it? What is the relationship of forces among the
Greeks? We have to pay close attention to this book that Foucault wanted so much to unpack
because he doesn’t mention these problems, but you can sense that we are in the middle of an
attempt to hook up The Use of Pleasure to Foucault’s other books. But he doesn’t feel the need
to say it, so we will patch them together ourselves… not patch them together, because I don’t
think it is forced, it really is, it is… it is… I think that The Use of Pleasure is an integral part of
the whole oeuvre.

So then, this is how I think the Greek diagram could be defined, and it would be very
Nietzschean and quite in line with what Comtesse just said: an agonistic relationship between

                                                                                                         9

free agents. An agonistic relationship – what does “agonistic” mean? I think that above all we
mustn’t confuse agonistic with polemic. It isn’t a relationship of war. What would an agonistic
relationship be? It is no longer a relationship of war, which would take us back to the feats of the
warrior, to magico-religious thought. Similarly, for “between free agents,” which is say they are
not agents who are under a higher sovereign, which would again take us back to magicoreligious thought. Here you have something specific. The diagram, the relationship of forces, that
corresponds to the Greek city is an agonistic relationship between free agents, between free men,
let’s say.

And what would this agonistic relationship, which is not a relationship of war, which is not a
polemical relationship, be? Well, we can clearly see that in the Greek city it is a relationship of
rivalry. It is a relationship of rivalry. And is it any accident that this word appears in Plato so
often? Rivals. The Greeks wage wars, of course, but they don’t think of themselves in terms of
war. They constantly think of themselves in terms of rivalry, in all senses of the word and the
most concrete ones: political rivalry around a magistracy, rivalry in court, rivalry in love. I think
that the fundamental theme of rivals in love starts with the Greeks – not at all that there weren’t
rivals elsewhere or in other formations, but in the other formations, it doesn’t seem… possible –
I don’t really know – to show that the rival is always thought in terms of something other than
pure rivalry.

For those who have studied a little Greek: amphisbetesis. Amphisbetesis is a word that has stood
out for me in Plato. What is Socrates’ method? What is the Platonic method, or an essential
element of the Platonic method, which to me really seems to mean: what is Greece? It is that
whatever the question is, rivals come forward saying: it’s me! it’s me! it’s me! That’s not war,
it’s rivalry. I say: what is the most beautiful? The Greeks don’t wait for the sovereign to decide,
they don’t decide it by coming to blows either, as in war, it’s not magico-religious thought
anymore. No doubt they lay claim to a place, in relationship to which… a place… an empty
place which the claimants rival over. I was saying to you: the most fund… or one of the most
fundamental texts of Plato’s in this respect is the Statesman. That is where politics is defined as
the art… or the politician is defined as the shepherd of men, and there you encounter Plato’s real
signature, the Platonic style, there are twelve, twenty, eighty… people, which is to say types of
forces, who put up their hand and say: I am the shepherd of men! It’s me! So, Socrates or
someone else, whoever is leading the dialogue, says: okay, let’s try to sort all of this out.3

When I say: love itself is thought in terms of rivalry, it is very interesting because, in effect, you
understand, it’s very different, once again it would be stupid to object that there have always
been rivals in love and cite Eastern texts for example. That’s not the question. It would be an
objection if you said to me: here are some Eastern texts where the rival in love is really thought
in terms of… in terms of and in relation to a pure category of rivalry. Of course, if… if you told
me that, that would represent an objection. We would work it out, we would see… or we
wouldn’t work it out and I would say: I beg your pardon, I was wrong… But it seems to me,
personally… You can see that the agonistic regime is so different from war that where do you
find it? You find it in judicial procedures. You find it in the proceedings of love, the process of
love. You find it in games, the role of games, the role of the athlete.

                                                                                                  10

And what is Platonism? If we had to give a definition of Platonism, the one I myself would give
is: a philosophy… it is really the phi… it is like… it is the realization of Greek philosophy.
Why? More than Aristotle, I think. Aristotle is already in a world that… [The gap is from
Deleuze] But Plato is the pure Greek philosophy. Why? Because he is the one who oriented the
whole of philosophy in the direction of the testing of rivals. How do you judge between rivals?
In each domain, who is the one who knows best? So okay, there are domains where it is
simple… The shoemaker… hence all of Socrates’ questions, all the technical questions, when he
says: well, there’s no problem when it comes to the shoemaker, everyone knows that when it
comes to shoes, the expert is the shoemaker. But what about in politics? Who is the expert there?
How do we decide between rivals? It’s a practical problem. How do we decide between them,
whether it is a matter of rivals in love, in court, other rivals…? That’s the Platonic question. It
isn’t… It isn’t: “What is an Idea?” If Plato’s Ideas – with a capital I – are so important, no doubt
it is because of their role in this very concrete question: how do we decide between rivals?

I am only saying this to shed a little… light on what Foucault says, very quickly, because in The
Use of Pleasure you find this invocation several times: an agonistic relationship between free
men. If you’re not paying close attention, you will read it in a mechanical way. I suggest you
attach great importance to this formulation each time it comes up in The Use of Pleasure,
because we need to see it as the specific diagram of the Greek city, which doesn’t apply to other
social formations. This is the specifically Greek thing. An agonistic relationship between free
agents, this is a definition that only applies to the Greek city.

And now we find that something follows on from this. So that was my first point in relation to
Foucault. I move on to the second point: that something will follow from this definition, or this
diagram. What will follow? Well, I can only call it a, let’s say, a detachment [décrochage]. And
after all he himself calls it, I believe, a detachment, we will see. Namely: as a function of the
diagram – agonistic relationship between free agents, between free men – only a free man can
govern free men, and only free men can be governed by a free man. That is the Cleisthenian ideal
of the city.

So then, who is the free man capable of governing other free men? Foucault’s answer, based on
the Greeks, or rather Foucault’s theme that runs through the whole of The Use of Pleasure, is:
look closely at Greek literature, even in the most apparently insignificant forms. The Greeks are
people who never stop telling you: the only one fit to govern others is the one who knows how,
who is capable of, governing himself. It is obvious that this is only valid in relation to the
diagram: free men, agonistic relationship between free men. Who will govern the other? The
answer is going to be: well, the only one capable of governing the other is the one capable of
governing himself. All right.

To govern himself. Here is Foucault’s trick. Why? Already at this level he has, he has his idea.
The idea is this: governing oneself is a very curious operation, because it can’t be reduced to
either the domain of power or the domain of knowledge. It is a specific operation, irreducible to
power, irreducible to knowledge. In other words, governing oneself is an operation that detaches
[décroche] both from power and from knowledge. It is the third axis for the Greeks. It is the third
axis. He says it in L’Usage des plaisirs, page 90 [77 Eng],4 “It would not be long before this
ascetics” – governing oneself – “would begin to have an independent status, or at least a partial

                                                                                                 11

and relative autonomy” – you see, governing oneself derives from something, but derives while
at the same time taking on an independent status. “It would not be long before this ascetics
would begin to have an independent status, or at least a partial and relative autonomy. In two
ways: there would be a detachment [décrochage] of the exercises that enabled one to govern
oneself from the learning of what was necessary in order to govern others.” Governing others is
the relationship of power.

You see, we had the “relationship of power” diagram, the relationship of forces. This specifically
Greek relationship of forces is the agonistic relationship between free agents. That’s what defines
power for the Greeks. Or else government, governing others. And something derives from this.
Since government takes place between free men, since the relationship of forces places the free
man in a relationship with another free man, the only one fit to govern the other, which is to say
a free man, is a free man, another free man capable of governing himself. The government of the
self will follow from the diagram, derive from the diagram and become independent. It becomes
independent in relation to the relationship of power, that’s another relationship. That’s another
relationship. “[T]here was also a detachment of the exercises themselves from the virtue,
moderation…” – of the exercises in self-government – “themselves from the virtue, moderation
and temperance for which they were meant to serve as training.” What does he mean there? The
whole context, moving more quickly, explains it. It is about virtue as a code and virtue as a code
of what? Virtue, such as it is for the Greeks, as a code of knowledge.

In short, governing oneself detaches [se détache] from both the diagram of power and the code
of knowledge. Governing oneself detaches from both the power relationships according to which
one governs the other, and the relationships of knowledge according to which each one knows
himself and knows others or the other. A double detachment [décrochage] in relationship to the
diagram of power, and in relationship to the code of knowledge. The relationship to the self
becomes independent, and this relationship to the self will receive a name from the Greeks at the
same time as it becomes independent, all the while deriving… You see, it doesn’t come first,
that’s what I want you to understand. It presupposes the Greek diagram. If there wasn’t a
relationship of forces, if the Greeks hadn’t invented a new relationship of forces, the agonistic
relationship established between free men, which didn’t exist before, if there wasn’t that, an art
of self-government would never have derived from it. First you have to have this diagram of
power, first you have to have this relationship of power, so that this new relationship of
governing oneself derives from it. So much so that… What does that mean and how is it derived?
Same page, page 90 [77], Foucault calls the government of the self, the art of the self. The art of
the self. This is what derives from the relationships of power, in the original form they have for
the Greeks.

And the Greeks call this art of the self, they call it enkrateia. Enkrateia. Which is to say -- how
to translate it -- power over oneself, power of the self. The relationship… is what he also calls
the relationship to the self. I would like – yes, one moment I think, [to someone wanting to ask a
question] because your question will only make sense if I finish this point, which is the most
difficult one. -- It’s that… Well, what does that mean? Well, in a certain way, you see, if we try
to draw it out, what is Foucault telling us there? Why? He amasses texts, he looks in Xenophon,
always this cry, in all the Greek authors, this theme: only the one who is capable of governing
himself is fit to govern others.

                                                                                                    12

But you see it would be a gross misunderstanding to conclude from this that the art of selfgovernment comes first for the Greeks. No, that’s not the line of reasoning at all. The Greek line
of reasoning, or in any case Foucault’s line of reasoning concerning the Greeks, is that the
Greeks invent a new relationship of forces, the relationship of forces between free men. That’s
what comes first. And that’s what defines the city. What is the relationship of forces between
free men? Once again, it isn’t war, it is rivalry. Second point: what follows from this is the
necessity of asking the question, “Who is the free man with the right to govern other free men?”
And the response is, necessarily: the one fit to govern other free men is the one fit to govern
himself. In other terms, what does the government of the self appear as? Well, it is effectively a
completely new state of force which is not included in the diagram. What does that mean? What
does it mean to govern oneself?

Let’s try to draw out “governing oneself” a little… it’s that force affects itself. A force that
affects itself, that is self-affecting, is self-governing, self-directing. But consider the extreme
novelty here: forever, from the beginning of our analysis, we have said: forces have no
interiority, all force refers to other forces, either in order to affect them or be affected by them
and, indeed, the relationships between forces were relationships between forces external to each
another. A force is affected by other forces from the outside or it affects other forces from the
outside. That’s the status of forces. If a force comes to affect itself, it is no longer affected by
another force, no more than it affects another force, it affects itself and, by that token, it is
affected by itself. It is the affecting of the self by the self.

Do you not recognize our whole theme here, to the point where I am almost embarrassed? In
other words: force has folded onto itself. Force has bent onto itself. I would say: there was a
subjectification. Force didn’t have either a subject or object, it only had a relationship with other
forces. In folding onto itself, it performs a subjectification. The subjectification of force is the
operation by which, in folding, it affects itself. The Greeks folded force onto itself, they related it
to itself, they related force to force. In other words, they doubled [doublé] force and in doing so
formed a subject, they invented an inside of force. The affecting of self by self. The Greeks
invented the doubling [doublure] by folding, bending force, or they invented subjectivity or even
interiority.

And people say the opposite, they say that the Greeks were unaware of interiority and
subjectivity. And there is indeed a reason why this can be said, in a certain way. What is it?
Well, it’s not very complicated, they invented subjectivity, but in the form of this operation of
subjectification by which force is folded onto itself. In other words, it is derivative. The Greeks
in effect had no idea of a subject that would be constitutive of anything. Subjectification derives
from a state of force. Between free men, the only one capable of governing is the one capable of
governing himself, which is to say of folding his own force onto itself. Subjectivity derives from
the specifically Greek state of force, from the specifically Greek relationships between forces. In
other words, we would say that [recording ends here] governing oneself or the art of the self or
the relationship…5 [Interruption of the recording] [74:53]

Part 3

                                                                                                   13

… Governing oneself, governing others, which is to say the relationship of forces between
distinct forces, the relationships of power between free agents, this is what we could call a
constituent power [pouvoir constituant]. It’s the constitutive power [pouvoir constitutif] of the
Greek city: an agonistic relationship between free men. Governing oneself is a regulatory
condition, it is not at all constituent, the proof being that Greece never stopped having tyrants.
It’s a simple regulatory condition. That should suggest something to you. I am saying: the rules
of power in a social formation are the obligatory rules – you must obey. The rules of knowledge,
the code of virtue is, in another way, also obligatory, another type of obligation. But governing
oneself, as a regulatory principle and no longer a constituent principle… governing oneself is
something else entirely. I would say: it’s an optional rule [règle facultative]. You’re a free man.
If you don’t want to govern yourself and if you want to govern others, at that moment you
become a tyrant, very well then. You’ll see what will happen. It’s an optional rule.

If you have paid really, really close attention, this should remind you of something. When we
were right at the beginning, when we were trying to analyze the very complex notion of the
statement in Foucault, I tried to show that the statement could not be assimilated to anything that
was known in linguistics, because the statement was always straddling systems, different
systems, heterogeneous systems, and so the statement included rules for passing from one system
to another. And I cited a case that wasn’t from Foucault, it was from an American linguist,
[Willam] Labov.6 I told you: yes, here for example is a small boy, a little black boy… who in his
everyday conversation passes twelve times in the space of a minute from standard American to
Black English and back again. We have to say that it’s always like that, that our speech is made
up of perpetual transitions from one system to another. But just as each homogeneous system,
considered in the abstract, is defined by constraining rules, and these are the only ones linguists
are familiar with, so our constant transitions from one system to the other – and I was saying to
you that each time we speak, we constantly jump from one system to another – so our constant
transition from one system to another is also governed by rules, but these rules cannot be called
constraining. Why? Because they have large margins of tolerance, first of all, and also because
they are no longer at all defined by an obligatory character.

Hence Labov’s expression, which I found very beautiful: variable or optional rule.7 And I
suggested using this notion to better understand Foucault’s theory of the statement, saying: yes,
statements in Foucault refer to variable or optional rules. In another way, if I bring a few things
together, you remember that more recently we kept finding how fascinated Foucault was by the
idea of something that folds, whether statements folding, as for the poet Raymond Roussel – a
proposition that folds onto another proposition – or visibilities themselves folding, and now we
are coming across the idea that what the Greeks invented was just this: they conceived
relationships of forces in such a way – this is what needs to be said first, you see, I’m still
maintaining the primacy of the diagram, which is to say the relationship of forces – they
conceived relationships of force – which is to say relationships of force with force, with another
force – they conceived it in such a way that it gave rise to the idea of a force that had to fold onto
itself, form a relationship, enter into a relationship with itself and no longer a relationship with
another force. The relationship of force to itself had to derive from the relationship of force with
others. And the relationship to itself was to become, unlike the relationship of power and the
relationship of knowledge in virtue, the relationship to the self was to become the optional rule
of the free man. The Greeks weren’t unaware of subjectivity and interiority, but it is true that

                                                                                                      14

they made it the optional rule of the free man, which is to say they made it the ultimate stake of
an aesthetics. Hence Foucault’s pages on the Greeks and aesthetic existence in The Use of
Pleasure, where Foucault doesn’t need to mention Nietzsche for his readers to understand that he
is referring to Nietzsche and aligning himself with him… and aligning himself with him, but
after a long detour that is wholly his own, wholly Foucault’s.

If I try to summarize this long detour, perhaps after all he summarizes it even better, this time
pages 73–77 -- ah no, that’s subjectification, there’s no… no, that’s still the agonistic
relationship, all of that, enkrateia, okay, very well… very well… I am trying to say that… -- I
haven’t forgotten you, ok? [Deleuze speaks to a particular student] -- They folded force. Which
is to say they put force in a relationship with itself. If the relationship of forces hadn’t become an
agonistic relationship between free agents, this operation would never have been possible, it
derives from this new relationship of power. The Greeks derived a government of the self from a
government of others, because they posited the government of others as a relationship between
free men. Because they produced this sort of diagram and… to the point where – I mean literally
– the domination of others among the Greeks is doubled by a domination of the self or, if you
prefer, I would say, which amounts to the same thing, force, in its relationship with force, folds
in a relationship with itself.

And this is what Foucault tells us… -- but where, good lord, I’ve lost… Dear, oh dear… an
essential text… -- he says something like… -- only you won’t believe me because, if I have lost
it… -- he more or less says… he says… -- Ah, I must find it… -- You see, the constitution, the
Greeks, invent subjectification, but they let it… they let it remain under an optional rule, which
is why idiots say: there is no subject for the Greeks. You can see how it is both a very, very long
way from Heidegger, and at the same time, this resonates with Heidegger, it is very very
interesting… -- But now, my excerpt… But I must, I must… dear oh dear… -- “Aesthetic
existence among the Greeks…” -- you will find it especially in 103–105, but I will find all of the
quotes I need except that one of course… Dear oh dear… Ah! Perhaps, perhaps… Ha ha! Ha ha!
93–94 [80–81 Eng] -- “this freedom…” -- this freedom, subjectification – “this freedom is more
than a nonenslavement, more than an emancipation that would make the individual independent
of any interior or exterior constraint; in its full, positive form it was a power,” here it is, listen to
this, “it was a power that one brought to bear on oneself in…” – in! – “in the power that one
exercised over others.” That’s precisely what occurs, it couldn’t be clearer. You first have to
posit the power over others, and then comes the interiorization or this doubling [doublure], this
folding of force which will constitute, in the power that one exercises over others, the power one
exercises over oneself. It is as though the relationship of forces folded. If you don’t start from the
relationship of forces… Subjectification is derivative. In other words, subjectification or, the
perfect formula – and just as I say that, I am going to lose it… I have a feeling I am going to…
The perfect formula is… oh dear… the relationship… the relationship with the self derives from
the relationship with others under the condition of an optional rule, which is the folding of force
onto itself, the bending of force onto itself, the fold of force onto itself.

It’s almost an answer to the question: why does the same man write The Use of Pleasure and
Raymond Roussel? Raymond Roussel is haunted by doubling [la doublure] and the problem of
doubling – we saw this the last time – and the folding of a proposition on a proposition. I was
saying to you the last time that… well yes, the Greeks are the first doubling, to speak like

                                                                                                       15

Heidegger, the first world-historical doubling. All right, you need to understand that, you need at
all costs… at all costs, but we’ve already done it so… what do I have to add… So! Over to you!

Comtesse: [Inaudible comment]

Deleuze: Personally, I must admit I wouldn’t say that, I wouldn’t dare say that, because it seems
certain to me that for the Greeks – unless you want to make them moderns – there is obviously
no constituting subject [sujet constituant], which is to say the subject is always derived, and the
subject is optionally derived. So, what is primary – and this is what absolutely must be
maintained – is the agonistic relationship, that is fundamentally primary. So what is the role of
necessity?

Comtesse: Methodologically primary…

Deleuze: No, ontologically primary. If there isn’t… Politically primary in the sense that, here,
politics is one of the very conditions of philosophy, because if you bring in the problem
“necessity or no necessity,” you see… that doesn’t seem very important to me, because that is a
much too general problem in relation to where we are at, it is more a matter of knowing what
type of necessity does Greek philosophy invent, which is not the same as the necessity of the
previous thought, of the previous type of thought. What is certain is that the relationship of
power happens between free agents, whether it is a matter of necessity or not, it happens between
free agents, which is to say between citizens. That’s the innovation of the Greek diagram, that’s
the new relationship of power, because before, in the imperial formations, you couldn’t say that
the relationship of power happened between citizens, and the citizen didn’t even exist, it can go
from the great emperor to the man… what kind of man? Would you say the free man? You
wouldn’t even say the free citizen, those are different notions. You could say that it goes from
the great citizen to the public servant. You could, of course… the public servant isn’t a slave,
there is a whole hierarchy, etcetera. But the very idea of a free agent is excluded, so I am much
less susceptible… so… now it is undoubtedly a Greek problem, what is the relationship of the
free man – which is to say the citizen – with necessity? And on that, we have seen other
problems for the Greeks, it works out, it takes a long time for the problem of necessity to be fully
articulated, it varies a lot, I think even that, if you are looking for an example where this problem
is embodied, it is Greek tragedy, what is the relationship between the free agent and necessity, it
is… it is… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]

But I absolutely maintain – in any case when it comes to Foucault, to reading The Use of
Pleasure – it seems to me that we don’t have the choice, it is absolutely necessary to posit and
maintain that force, in the first instance, can only be in a relationship with other forces that either
affect it or that it affects. If, in the second instance, force comes to affect itself, it is because the
relationship, the first relationship of forces, presented original characteristics that made such a
twisting of force on itself possible or such a folding of force on itself possible. So, it is
effectively a… It’s important to respond because I have the impression that with the Greek
miracle, we haven’t all… we’ve never gotten past it… whether it’s Hegel or Heidegger, they
have a sort of Greek miracle, whether it is the recent historians, they have a sort of Greek
miracle… and here the Greek miracle, you can just get a sense of Foucault’s originality: they
bent force onto itself in such a way that force affects itself. So, it is a very modest response.

                                                                                                      16

Foucault can laugh, in, in… you realize, in this book, which seems so sensible, but you can’t
read it without thinking at the same time of Heidegger’s grand pages on the revelation of Being.
That’s why Foucault, in an interview at the end of his life, said: oh, the Greeks… pfft… yes,
they’re good, but no need to make a big fuss about it. It’s good, it’s interesting, but it’s not as
great as all that. He wanted to say: no, the Greeks aren’t the dawn of being… they did something
that was… very interesting, they are the first to have bent force onto itself. So, you’ll say to me
as well, didn’t this theme already exist in the East: that to govern others well, you have to govern
oneself, etc.? We’d have to examine the texts very closely, what are the virtues of the
sovereign… I’m not sure that theme is there, which precisely presupposes a society of free men,
that is, pure citizens.

You see, if the relationships of forces aren’t established between free men, force has no reason to
bend back onto itself. If it is established between free men, then and only then does the question
arise: who is the best free man capable of governing other free men? And the response becomes:
the one who has been able to bend force, in other words, the one fit to govern others is the one
who has learned to govern himself. But learning how to govern oneself is the art of self or the
relationship to the self or, if you prefer, it is subjectification, and it isn’t the same thing as either
the relationship of forces, which defines power, or the moral code, which defines knowledge.
Here again is our idea: distinct from the axis of power and the axis of knowledge is a third axis –
which is what now? Let’s define the third axis as the bending of the relationship of forces or
subjectification, which is to say the operation by which force affects itself.

A student: Can I ask a question?

Deleuze: Of course.

The student: [Inaudible comment; he raises the distinction between “lack in power” and “lack in
knowledge”]

Deleuze: Could you open it up a bit, I feel like we’re suffocating… Open the window, please,
over there…

The student: From the moment that this third level is produced, is it lack… how can we think of
lack of knowledge. This isn’t entirely clear.

Deleuze: I don’t understand how you’ve brought in the issue of lack, what’s that doing here?

The student: The question of the non-lived memory, isn’t that also lack?

Deleuze: Why? Why say that?

Deleuze: Because it’s… it’s a memory that [inaudible comments]

Deleuze: Why say that, hm? I mean: why bring in the problem of lack… I don’t see what you are
latching that on to in all this.

                                                                                                    17

The student: [Inaudible comment]

Deleuze: The lack of?

The student: Of power.

Deleuze: But where is there a lack of power?

The student: In the free men, who call themselves free, where the center is empty, there is lack…

Deleuze: Ah no, not at all! We would even have to… Comtesse was going quickly because he
very kindly sensed that we were all in a hurry but… emptiness [vide]… emptiness, emptiness…
If you say it’s lack, you’re joking. If you say, to speak like Heidegger, emptiness is what can’t be
occupied by the being [l’étant]. It’s Being [c’est de l’être]. Why would it be emptiness, I mean,
it’s not necessarily lack. There is no reason to assimilate emptiness… You see, to my knowledge,
Foucault doesn’t talk about lack. Now you can always, if it’s your problem… but, in my view,
that would decenter everything if you interrogate something on… You can say that an empty
place is empty because it lacks something or someone, but it’s a place, so even if it is a hole, it’s
not a lack. A hole is not a lack. It’s a place, which has a location, which is… No, I think that
your question in the end must be personal, but there’s nothing I can do about that, I mean, you
must yourself have, there, if you pose certain problems of power as a function of a lack… But for
Foucault, not at all, his definition of power is: relationships of forces insofar as forces affect each
other, end of story. But there is no void, no lack in that…

The student: [Inaudible comment]

Deleuze: Yes. Ah, no, yes, it’s not that. The important thing is, if you like, the important thing is
– this is what I would like you to understand – it’s that, in effect, Foucault is responding in his
own way to “why is philosophy Greek?” And the Greeks… because it is under the conditions of
the specifically Greek relationships of forces that force can, in a derivative way… can,
secondarily, fold onto itself or affect itself. To the point where we have almost answered a
question that concerned us: in what way is The Use of Pleasure fully part of Foucault’s oeuvre
and does not in any way mark a rupture, whatever the change or Foucault’s sort of
mischievousness at the end, where his style takes on a sort of serenity. There are reasons… I
think there are some very important novelties in The Use of Pleasure, but we are at least in the
process of answering part of the question: what it has in common with the rest of the oeuvre. It’s
that in The Order of Things,8 Foucault was constantly haunted by the theme of the fold and
unfolding, and on the other hand in Discipline and Punish and the Will to Knowledge, he had
pushed a theory of power as far as possible. And then it was like he found himself unable to
breathe: how to break through the line? Am I doomed to stay on the side of power? And you can
see how, on this point, we will see what that… It’s the Greeks for the moment, but we’ll see
what questions all of that poses for us today. He will be led to say: yes, there, that’s it,
subjectification or the production of a subjectivity under optional rules, that’s what the Greeks
invented and there’s the axis that goes beyond relationships of power.

                                                                                                     18

So, once again, that is the Greek question. Does it concern us? Does it not concern us? That’s for
later, because, on that subject, I haven’t… I haven’t finished. So much so that – one last effort,
we’ll have a little rest in a moment, but to make it a little more concrete… -- Force, then, in a
derivative way – you can see I insist on this point – the force that is derived from a specifically
Greek relationship of forces, the derived force, folds onto itself in such a way that it affects itself
and produces a subjectivity. Once again: subjectification. So, I keep repeating the same formula,
this is the last time, because… is it quite clear? I’m very happy to start everything again from the
beginning…

The same student: Can I say something?

Deleuze: Of course, of course!

The student: Agonistic rivalries emerge from relations of power, and even emerge from forms of
knowledge, and constructing subjectivity… [Indistinct words]. Once freed, once folded back on
oneself, and with pure citizens, there is, there will be joy in order to cross the lines of power and
to cross the lines of knowledge. And yet, in Nietzsche’s representation, between Apollo and
Dionysus, there is a side, despite the joy, of Dionysus’s suffering, there’s his heartbreak
[déchirement]. So, this what I come back to when you answer…

Deleuze: Oh, well that, that can be quickly… that can be done very quickly, no problem, no
problem at all because, in my opinion, and it’s no big problem, you are mixing up two sorts of
text. The texts on Apollo-Dionysus – to recap very quickly – are authentically Nietzschean texts
but ones that wholly and once and for all concern Nietzsche’s first book, which Nietzsche
repudiated. It was a point in time when he hadn’t discovered anything of what he later calls joy.
Untimely Meditations marks the start of the second Nietzsche, which is to say the true Nietzsche,
who is no longer a disciple of Wagner and Schopenhauer. It is as though he recants, but at the
same time the Birth of Tragedy is still a sublime book… It is difficult, it is out of the question to
leave it out of a reading of Nietzsche, but when he discovers the problem of joy, there is
absolutely no more, absolutely no more question of the theme of suffering, which is… which
belongs to the first period of Nietzsche.

Third remark: does that mean there is no more suffering and no pain? No, but at that point the
Nietzschean response changes completely, it’s something I’ve alluded to, it consists in saying
that we have to take our pains and sufferings, however terrible they are, within a system of
reactions, which enters… or rather, take them within a group, within reactions, flood them with
reactions, which makes them enter into a system of actions, where action gains the upper hand
over reaction itself, which is to say the construction of a mode of life. He doesn’t mean at all…
The construction of a mode of life, which is to say the invention of possibilities of life. For
Nietzsche, whatever the suffering, there is always the possibility of inventing a possibility of life,
until… until the moment when it ends… okay then, you die, but up until the last moment you
invent possibilities of life. That would be Nietzsche’s response, which no longer has anything to
do with either Apollo or Dionysus, which has to do with Zarathustra.

So, I think, your question… I’m responding in a very disappointing way, but because… I think it
is important for those of you who read Nietzsche to read The Birth of Tragedy but at the same

                                                                                                    19

time, each time it talks about suffering, to not forget that these are pre-Nietzschean texts, and it is
the only book of Nietzsche’s that isn’t representative of… of his thought as it would become, as
it would… It’s a book, as he says himself in Ecce Homo, he says: this book is so
Schopenhauerian and it even still smells Hegelian. That says it all, for Nietzsche. That says it all.
It still smells Hegelian, it’s a Schopenhauerian book.9 It’s not a Nietzschean book. The fact
remains that you can’t understand Nietzsche without having read The Birth of Tragedy… even if
only to measure the progress.

So, what I would like to know if it is completely clear because personally, I’m ready to start
again. What you have to understand in all of this is: how there is a new relationship of forces
with the Greeks. Secondly: why a folding, a bending of force derives from it. Thirdly, if there
hadn’t been the new relationship of forces with the Greeks, the bending of force onto itself could
not have happened.

A student: But how does this bending onto itself work? Aren’t we staying there on the level of
the virtual? Doesn’t it need to go through the actualization of force?

Deleuze: Excellent. Fantastic question. Well, I say “fantastic” for me because that’s what’s left
for me to do. I agree completely. Otherwise, it would be just words. So, allow me, before we
stop, to say as well: bending force onto itself, that’s all very well… that is indeed still abstract.
Maybe it stays less abstract… it’s that force is like a river, or, even more, it’s like a river, it
divides into affluents, and it never folds just once. And if you read – it seems to me – The Use of
Pleasure, you’ll realize he doesn’t use the word “fold” [pli] there, there are four foldings
[plissements]. Everything happens as though subjectification as the production of a subjectivity
takes place with four foldings. Wonderful, it becomes concrete: we are made of four folds, or
rather we are surrounded by four folds, we live in four folds, which we make and remake like we
make our bed. And you’ll find these four folds, on the one hand, in The Use of Pleasure, pages
32–39 [25–32 Eng], and you’ll find them, summarized, in the Dreyfus and Rabinow book, pages
333–334.10 It’s just that they are difficult… and so I would like, because we need to move
forward, I would like to almost solidify them and, I mean, systematize them. Foucault doesn’t
systematize them and no doubt he’s right, but we who are simply commentating, we can
systematize them.

There is a first fold that concerns… once again, it’s about…. force folds onto itself. And in
folding onto itself, it surrounds a part of ourselves, a material part of ourselves. Force traverses
us, it is very simple, you see, you are traversed by forces, force traverses you. When force folds,
it surrounds a part of you. But consider – and feel the rising excitement because this anticipates
our future work – there is no reason to think that it will always be in the same way; there is no
reason to think that the folds are constant. Am I folded like a Greek? Well… that’s a
fundamental question. Is there one subjectification or did the Greeks simply invent a
subjectification that, later on, could take on all sorts of other configurations? We don’t know, we
can only say in relation to the Greeks. We carefully set aside this problem of other modes of
subjectification. Until now.

Hence perhaps the question, and The Use of Pleasure, a book on the Greeks, comes back like a
sort of slap in the face in its most current form: and now? How do we fold ourselves now? What

                                                                                                       20

are your own folds? What do you fold yourself in? Which is to say: how do you produce yourself
as a subject? I can say “how do you produce yourself as a subject?” or “how do you fold
yourself?,” it’s the same thing… These are ways of saying… so, it works… if you don’t fold
yourself well, it doesn’t work. So… The Greeks, I am saying, there is a first fold, the one that
surrounds a determinable material part of ourselves. What is it in the case of the Greeks? The
body and its pleasures. In effect. Why the body and its pleasures? To govern oneself is first of all
to govern one’s body, so the material part of myself that finds itself surrounded in the fold,
folded in the fold, is the body and its pleasures, and the Greeks conceived it in those terms: the
body and its pleasures, which they called the aphrodisia. Why did they call it aphrodisia? We
have to be careful, we don’t know yet. It’s not clear, we’ll leave that to one side. The body, the
body and its pleasures, is not only about aphrodisiac pleasures, it can also be about food-related
pleasures, the Greeks were very preoccupied with their food. They didn’t spend all their time
looking at being! [Laughter] They were enormous eaters! So, the body and its pleasures… but
very quickly: do you think a Christian would say that? The part of ourselves surrounded by the
fold is the body and its pleasures. No, that’s not Christian at all, only a Greek can say that: the
body and its pleasures. To the point where it lends support to Foucault’s case: isn’t there
something, after all, we can take from the Greeks, a culture of the body and its pleasures? Many,
many have rediscovered the body and its pleasures, perhaps not in the Greek way, or perhaps
also in the Greek way.

Why have homosexual movements very often championed the body and its pleasures? As
distinct from what? Ah, it’s because a Christian – what does he say? I’m getting too far ahead. A
Christian talks about – it is even his invention – the flesh. The flesh, that’s a Christian invention.
The flesh and its desires. The flesh and its desires. The body is a site of pleasure. The flesh is a
site of desire. So, is there any lack in that? [laughter] The flesh. And there is a whole history of
the flesh, but today it is as though, strangely, we have rediscovered it – guess where? What a
surprise, in phenomenology. Husserl has great texts on the flesh, and Heidegger also takes up the
theme of the flesh. This gives me great pleasure because I always suspected that Husserl was
deeply Thomist. It’s not surprising. The flesh and its desires. So, is it an accident that Foucault’s
unpublished work is called The Confessions of the Flesh? He already gives us a sign: after the
body and its pleasures of the Greeks, there is the flesh and the desires of the Christian. It’s a
material part surrounded by the fold, but it’s another form of fold.

So, you see, first fold: the one that surrounds a material part of myself. Second fold – well, I am
talking about it like a fold, but it is just as much four aspects of the same fold – this is the rule
according to which the fold is made, the rule of the folding. And, indeed, then… You will see it
is not quite like that, let me clarify, you will read the text and you will see it is not quite like that
– so don’t call me a liar, I will have warned you – but you’ll see it is almost like that. And by the
same token you’ll see that if it is not quite how I am presenting it, it is because it is more
convenient for me to make it more solid and systematic… All right…

Yes, as for this second fold, the rule of the fold…: “Is it, for instance, divine law that has been
revealed in a text? Is it natural law, in each case the same for all living beings? Is it a rational
rule? Is it an aesthetic principle of existence?”11 I would say that the rule of the fold can be the
divine law, natural law, the law… all right, let’s say it’s the logos. The rule of the fold for the

                                                                                                   21

Greeks as logos. And, in effect, what is logos according to Heidegger’s fantastical etymologies?
It’s the gathering, the harvesting, it’s the rule of harvesting.

Third fold: this is the relationship in which, being already a subject in the process of formation, I
am in a relationship with the truth, the relationship of the true with myself and the relationship of
myself with the truth, with the true. And there again, same question: can you believe that our
relationship with the truth… it’s no longer “what is the truth?” It’s “what is our relationship with
the true?” Can we believe that we have the same relationship with the true as the Greeks?
Obviously not. So, all that already suggests to us that all of these folds… [Deleuze does not
complete the sentence]

Fourth form of the fold, or fourth fold: what are we waiting for, for the subject? Because
remember [Maurice] Blanchot’s beautiful formulation: when the outside folds, an interiority of
waiting is constituted. Folded subjectivity is waiting. Surrounded by my folds, I wait. But what
am I waiting for? But there again, I apply my rule of variation: is it the same thing to wait, to be
worthy of memory, to await immortality, to await a happy death, to await freedom? Imagine
whatever you want – what am I waiting for? That’s the fourth fold. Subjectivity as the interiority
of waiting. So maybe it is even… it’s not a list… there is no reason… But, for the Greeks, there
are… [Interruption of the recording] [2:01:14]

Part 4

… I don’t think, well, there are only a few raving lunatics who don’t want their memory to
disappear. No, it can’t be that, our relationship with the truth, it must be something else – what is
it, what is our subjectivity of waiting? Our interiority of waiting? And you, what are you waiting
for? So, you can see the swarm of questions. The Greeks with the four folds. Reading Greek
literature, I can assign, even with the quite large variations between the Greeks, but I have to ask,
almost for each period: how do the folds vary? What are the new folds? What are your folds?
Which folds? Do you live as though surrounded with folds? Hence the choice – you remember
the text I read you the last time, the comparison that Foucault made between Raymond Roussel
and Michel Leiris? The more prudent one, Michel Leiris, surrounds himself with folds, surrounds
himself with folds inside which he finds absolute memory. And the other, with a fundamental
imprudence, undoes the folds to enter into the unbreathable void and there find death. Maybe we
are even perpetually engaged in an activity where we don’t know whether we are surrounding
ourselves with folds or undoing the folds. We don’t really know.

Or perhaps we undo a fold over here and surround ourselves over there. It’s a question that’s
very, very… very multiple, the question of how each of us exist, of modes of existence… And
this is a very rough summary, but it’s a summary: yes, broadly speaking, broadly speaking we
have four folds – that’s already a lot, it’s already four folds – we undo some when we surround
ourselves with others… Surround ourselves… or else we surround ourselves in all of them… Is
there a danger of regressing when we are completely surrounded like that with all these
bandages, all around us? Is there not a…? What do we need to do? Undo the bandages, or tighten
them? Sometimes one, sometimes the other… but that’s what folding is, or unfolding. All right.

                                                                                                    22

But we haven’t finished, we haven’t finished because it’s still too abstract. We have just added
something by saying: when force folds on itself, we manage to surround ourselves one way or
another [tant bien que mal] – I stress, I am choosing my words carefully – we manage to
surround ourselves one way or another with four folds that are sometimes unfolded and
sometimes refolded. There. Have a rest. Have a rest. Don’t forget your watches, I beg you: a
quarter of an hour, okay, 15 minutes… [Interruption of the recording] [2:04:25]

… So, then… You see… [noise of students settling in] … Ah… So, we can at least give an
answer to “What are the two apparent fundamental innovations of The Use of Pleasure?” I would
say that it is the discovery of the relationship to the self as an independent axis in relation to
power and knowledge, independent in so far as it derives from the relationships of power but it
assumes but assumes its own autonomy. We’ll see what consequences that entails, in any case it
is an autonomous axis. We can no longer say that Foucault’s philosophy is built on two axes –
knowledge and power – but on three axes – knowledge, power and subjectification. Second
point: this axis turns out to be so original that it can be evaluated over a long period of time, from
the Greeks to us. The history of subjectification from the Greeks to us, with the… questions I
just asked: is there reason to conceive of variations in the folds? But for all that we still find
ourselves faced with a relatively urgent problem, the one that Foucault tries to work through over
the whole introduction to The Use of Pleasure. It is: but what about sexuality in all of this?
Because The Use of Pleasure is presented as a continuation of the History of Sexuality, namely
as the second volume, but the relationship to the self, the folding of force, all of that – what is the
relationship with sexuality?

And Foucault tells us a story about this, in an interview, where he says: after the Will to
Knowledge… and you remember how the Will to Knowledge placed him in a… at least what he
considered to be an impasse, namely: power… he is caught in the impasse of the relationships of
power – how to get out or how to break through the line? There, now, he has discovered how to
get out of it: through what derives from it, through the relationship to the self, through
subjectification. We haven’t really understood yet the concrete aspects of this answer, what it
meant politically, all of that… but in any case, we can see the outlines of an answer. But on the
other hand, we no longer see where we are at all when it comes to sexuality. And in an interview,
Foucault says this:12 after the Will to Knowledge and the crisis that we have tried to analyze,
coming after the Will to Knowledge, Foucault’s crisis, well Foucault tells us: I wrote a book
which was a continuation of the History of Sexuality, which was about sexuality. And then I
abandoned it. We may suppose, as per our hypothesis, that he abandoned it because the impasse
of the relationships of power became more and more intolerable for him. So, he says: it was the
relationship to the self that became a central notion for me, and I wrote a book on the
relationship to the self, but there wasn’t any relationship to sexuality any more, and I needed a
third version to establish a sort of proportion, an equilibrium, between the relationship to the self
and sexuality. It’s this third version that’s available to us. And so then, it remains for us to say
today what this… what this relationship between the relationship to the self and sexuality is,
between subjectification and sexuality?

When someone asked me a question before and I said: that leads in to what is left for me to do, I
think he said something very pertinent. Just as the relationships of forces, the relationships of
power, would remain virtual or at least evanescent if they weren’t actualized in the forms of

                                                                                                       23

knowledge, so the relationship to the self, with its folds, needs to be actualized; it would remain
completely abstract if it wasn’t actualized. But in what? The immediate answer is in sexuality.
It’s in sexuality. But why is it in sexuality? It has to be said that it’s not so much – it seems to
me, in Foucault’s thought, that’s why he had so many problems – it’s not so much in virtue of a
logical necessity, it is much more to do with a fortunate encounter. It’s that sexuality has a very
curious character, at least in the way the Greeks apprehended it. Its character is to actualize the
two aspects of force by qualifying them according to two different personae. That’s what is
interesting about Greek sexuality… or should we say about sexuality in general? Not sure. But in
any case, in Greek sexuality, it is very clear: each time they talk about sexuality, it is about man
as a force which affects and woman as a force that is affected. You’ll tell me that’s a cliché…
Not sure. Not sure.

Foucault explains that not only is sexuality no longer thought about that way in psychoanalysis,
but already in Christianity sexuality is no longer thought about that way. He explains that what
clearly appears in Christianity is what Foucault calls a bisexual structure, a bisexual structure of
the incarnate being, which is very different from a differentiation into two personae, one of
which actualizes the affected force and the other the affecting force. So perhaps that is part of
Greek literature, and not just Greek literature, perhaps it is part of Greek life, this idea of a
woman as affected force, the female as affected force, the male as affecting force…

So perhaps that would explain many things. Because let’s go back to the relationship to the self,
this derived subjectivity. At first glance, it has no reason to be incarnated in sexuality rather than
somewhere else. The relationship to the self consists in governing oneself, which is to say
affecting oneself. Why wouldn’t that happen in relation to other practices, and sexuality among
them, but others as well? And Foucault is the first to remark that when the notion of the
relationship to the self or enkrateia makes its appearance among the Greeks, it is not connected
directly or in a privileged way to sexuality, it is connected to food. There needs to be a slow
detachment [décrochage], and Foucault again uses the word décrochage,13 and you can see that
the word is well justified here because it appears all the time. There needs to be a slow
detachment of sexuality from the model of food for the relationship to the self to be incarnated,
actualized in sexuality in a privileged way. You see, to summarize, the relationship to the self –
which is to say the operation by which I govern myself – has to be actualized, but, at first glance,
has no reason to actualize itself in sexuality in any privileged way, it can actualize itself in the
area of food. But, there again it is a slow drift or derivation [dérivée], little by little sexuality will
detach from the model of food and become the privileged matter for the actualization of the
relationship to the self, insofar as the sexual relationship brings together a woman as affected
force and a man as affecting force. If you’re overhasty, you’ll say to me: what about Greek
pederasty? What about Greek homosexuality? Don’t be overhasty. Because that’s the foundation
that explains why the relationship to the self, “good self-government,” “government of the self,”
will be actualized in sexuality.

“Governing oneself” as a regulatory element of “governing others” will be directly actualized in
sexuality. And this time it’s in three forms, three forms or three relationships, so it gets
complicated: we mustn’t confuse the four types of fold we looked at before – and you won’t in
your reading of The Use of Pleasure – we mustn’t confuse the four forms of the fold with the

                                                                                                   24

three relationships in which the government of the self, the relationship to the self, is expressed
in sexuality.

The first relationship is a simple relationship, its formula is: governing oneself in order to govern
one’s body and its pleasures – the aphrodisia. This is what Foucault calls the “dietetics of
pleasures,” Chapter 2 in The Use of Pleasure.

The second one is a composite relationship: governing oneself in order to govern woman, one’s
wife, well; governing oneself in order to govern one’s wife well, which is to say make her
receptive, because she is the receptive force and she is in charge of the household. Governing the
wife and making her receptive. This is no longer about the dietetics of pleasures, it is what
Foucault calls the economy of the household and for the Greeks, “economy” means this
household management. The economy of the household, and this is no longer a simple
relationship, it is a composite relationship. The man-woman relationship.

And then, the third one – and this should be no surprise to us – is a cleft relationship [rapport
dédoublé] and it is the strangest and the most unusual relationship among the Greeks. This time
it is governing oneself not in order to govern boys well, but in order to lead boys to learn to
govern themselves, because they are future free men. Governing oneself in one’s relationship
with boys in order to lead boys to govern themselves. It’s a dual relationship, it’s what Foucault
calls – to remind us he is a bit Kantian – the antinomy of the boy, page 243 [221 Eng]. Page 243:
“Hence the problem that we may call ‘the antinomy of the boy’ […]. On the one hand, young
men were recognized as objects of pleasure – and even as the only honorable and legitimate
objects of pleasure among the possible male partners of men: no one would ever reproach a man
for loving a boy, for desiring and enjoying him, provided that the laws and proprieties were
respected. But on the other hand, the boy, whose youth must be a training for manhood,14 could
not accept to recognize himself as an object in this relationship which is still conceived in the
form of domination. He could not and must not identify with that role, he could not of his own
accord, in his own eyes and for his own sake, be that object of pleasure, even though the man
was quite naturally fond of appointing him as an object of pleasure. In short, to delight in and be
a subject of pleasure with a boy did not cause a problem for the Greeks; but to be an object of
pleasure and to acknowledge oneself as such constituted a major difficulty for the boy. The
relationship that he was expected establish with himself in order to become a free man, master of
himself and capable of prevailing over others, was at variance with a form of relationship in
which he would be an object of pleasure for another.”

This is precisely the cleft relationship: once again, the man who loves a boy must govern
himself, but not, as in the case of the wife, in order to govern the wife well but in order to
prepare the boy to be a free man, that is, to prevent the free man from being governed… to
prevent the boy from being governed by others. Hence the seemingly insoluble problems
whenever a historian tries to examine the status of pederasty among the Greeks, which are
perhaps less of a surprise to Foucault than to the historians, namely – it’s quite simple –this
government of the self in relationships with boys must always be understood in the form of the
optional rule, but this is no doubt the case where the optional rule is the most… the most
pressing. The optional rule according to which a free man constitutes himself as a subject, and
the optional rule according to which he constitutes himself as a subject will be, at the same time,

                                                                                                    25

the one according to which he will teach the boy to constitute himself as subject in turn. Hence
the relationship is cleft.

So where are we, I wanted to finish there for today; I’ve more or less done everything I wanted,
it’s good, we went quickly. Perhaps we went too quickly, I don’t know… It’s very simple now, if
you accept that we have outlined… we have really discovered the third axis, and that the third
axis is, as we expected, folding, bending. But now it has been given a name – not knowledge or
power but subjectification. If you accept as well that this axis was present from the beginning in
Foucault’s work, but it didn’t appear for itself, it appeared as completely intermingled with
knowledge and power. We had to look for it in the operations of Roussel, we had to look for it…
Nevertheless, we have our three axes now, we can see clearly now how they are autonomous,
relatively autonomous, but we still know that – this is not an appearance – they never stop
mingling with each other. Namely, in particular, once the relationships of power have given rise
to the derived art of the self, the constitution of the self or subjectification, which escapes them,
since it operates under an optional rule – it more or less corresponds to what Nietzsche called the
aristocrat, it’s the optional rule of the aristocracy, the aristocrat.

So, having said this, power constantly tries to recapture this new dimension, this new axis, and
knowledge constantly tries to reoccupy it, so much so that we will see… everything will start
again, there will be a history of a new type of struggle. How does power try to appropriate for
itself the processes of subjectification that escape it? How does knowledge try to occupy the
subjectification that escapes it? What needs to happen for the relationship with the self, in the
case of power, what needs to happen for power, literally, to take back, capture this relationship
with the self? What needs to happen for the relationship with the self to become an object of
knowledge? Which is to say, how do we avoid the optional rules being absorbed into the
constraining rules that will distort them, rules of power and codes of knowledge?

Subjectification will be taken up in a code of virtue which will be a veritable knowledge, or in a
code of normality that will be a veritable science. The processes of subjectification will be taken
up by the institutions of power, and there modern history begins, starting with the Greeks, in
other words, the conversion of optional rules into constraining rules. The optional rule of the
aristocrat will be turned into a constraining rule that is a burden on we poor slaves. And in two
famous ways. Power will not rest until it controls the innermost subjectivity of an individual
among its subjects, and that was already the orientation of a power that Foucault defined as the
power of the church, as pastoral power. Pastoral power, the pastor as a form of… as the man of
power, searches through the most intimate subjectivity and reintroduces the relationship with the
self into relationships of power, it submits subjectivity to relationships of power. And this power
of the church, this pastoral power, will be taken up into the power of the state in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries and there Foucault can pick up the analyses of Discipline and Punish:
how does the disciplinary state capture the innermost subjectivity in relationships of power. And
at the same time new types of science and knowledge will be formed – moral sciences, human
sciences – where subjectivity will become and be submitted to a control and subordination that
invokes science.

That’s what needs to be… You see it’s a varied history because at each period, it doesn’t occur
in same way. So, do we need to say: yes, there was subjectification once, under fragile and

                                                                                                    26

optional rules, those of the Greek aristocracy and then, afterwards, pastoral power and the power
of the state on the one hand and, on the other hand, knowledge, self-knowledge, moral science,
etcetera, afterwards power and knowledge took back this new domain of subjectification? Or do
we need to say: well of course, of course, that’s no big problem. Each time, when the Greeks
discovered it, subjectification under optional rules, they themselves very quickly appropriated
them in the first place, they themselves did it, they didn’t wait for the church… and then the
pastors, pastoral power, the power of the priest, made it its privileged matter, searching inside
souls, and then knowledges… all of that. But didn’t the relationship with the self, didn’t the
movement of subjectification, at that moment, take on new forms? Wouldn’t new types of
subjectification form, very different from Greek subjectification, and able to oppose the new
forms of power and new forms of knowledge which, in the end, had only taken up the previous
subjectification? Wouldn’t new subjectifications constantly remerge from their ashes, to the
point where the arms of the state, the arms of the priest, the arms of knowledge, would only close
around the last subjectivity, the most recent one, but there would always be another
subjectification already in the process of being formed?

Hence the importance of the question: new folds were taking shape, and it’s from these new
folds that resistances to power would emerge, whether the old powers, the new powers…
resistances to the new knowledges. And, in this sense… [Pause] I don’t know what I wanted to
add any more. Well, no matter, so you see, well, that continued, that continued, that didn’t stop.
As a result, it sees to me, the question “what are our folds, today, what threatens them?” resumes
its full function. We maintain two things today, or rather we are threatened by two things: that
our subjectivity comes under the control and dependency of a power, whether the power of the
priests, the power of the church, the power of the state… Because power has never stopped really
wanting to appropriate subjectification for itself.

I read some proposal, something so idiotic, which seemed idiotic to me – it discourages one from
writing, I don’t mean myself, but it is discouraging – by a famous professor of medicine… who
works on blood and who wrote a big book on blood, and he said: we were promised a mass
medicine, but it’s not true: medicine has never been so focused on the individual. One tells
oneself… there is something sad here because he concludes that this is proof that private
medicine is independent of power, because it is becoming more and more narrowly focused on
the individual. So, I say this is sad, this is sad for Foucault. Foucault spent years, pages, brilliant
pages in my view, showing that the power of the state became an individuating power over the
course of the eighteenth century. So, I don’t doubt that medicine is focused on the individual,
that is the very definition of the power of medicine. There’s no danger of it becoming a mass
medicine, it’s a medicine that will go further and further down the path of complete
individuation. To draw the conclusion, you understand, that this is the proof that it is independent
of power, it makes one despair… There’s really no point saying anything anymore because it
will never be of any use and people will continue to say that because it is individuating, it is
outside of power. From the eighteenth century, once again, the power of the state became an
individuating power. A prisoner is perfectly individuated, he is even in prison in so far as he has
been supremely individuated. Power is individuating, it’s obvious. All right, all that was to say to
you, you understand…

                                                                                                                    27

But in short, the struggle isn’t over. The more power and the more knowledge… the more power
and the more knowledge – once again I am finishing on this point – captures this subjectification,
which derives from it but was independent of it, the more new modes of subjectification form,
perpetually, almost without us realizing it, half unconsciously. What happens? It is obvious, for
example, that in a certain way ’68, May ’68, was a relationship with power, a relationship with
knowledge, and a fundamental relationship with subjectification. And that it launched, it
launched new modes of subjectification. So, it’s like anything, we must always say to ourselves:
well then, modes of subjectification, it’s like forms of knowledge and relationships of power,
some are grotesque, some are terrifying, some are sublime, some are beautiful… there is no
reason to… But what is interesting is to see how, around the great historical ruptures, forms of
subjectification are formed, take shape. When Foucault writes The Use of Pleasure, you can be
sure that what he has in mind, as always… when he wrote Discipline and Punish, he had in mind
the problem of punishment today in 1970, I don’t know the date… here, what he has in mind
when he does this pseudo-return to the Greeks is: what mode of subjectification can we hope for
today and now? All right, until next time. [End of the recording] [2:36:33]

Notes

  Translator’s note: Latin word meaning “family-based.”
  Les Maîtres de vérité en Grèce archaïque (Paris : Maspero, 1967). English translation: The Masters of Truth in
Archaic Greece, trans. Janet Lloyd (New York: Zone Books 1996).
  Regarding the relations of rivalry, see L’Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze, “F as Fidelity”, and also the introduction to
What Is Philosophy?, pp. 9-11.
  Histoire de la sexualité 2: L’usage des plaisirs (Éditions Gallimard, 1984). English translation: The Use of
Pleasure, trans. Robert Hurley (Vintage Books, 1990), p. 77. Translation modified: in order to fit the broader
context of Deleuze’s usage of this term in this session, the translation of décrochage has been changed from
‘differentiation’ to ‘detachment’. Page numbers of the English translation of this work will be given between
parentheses following the French ones.
  For the argument and the analysis of The Uses of Pleasure, see Foucault, pp. 99-108.
  See sessions 4 and 5 of this seminar, November 12 and 19, 1985.
  On Labov and these points, see Foucault, “A New Archivist”, on The Archaeology of Knowledge, p. 5 (and note 7,
p. 134, and note 18, pp. 146-147). Note that an earlier version of this chapter appeared in Critique 274 (1970), pp.
195-209.
  Deleuze says “les choses et les mots” (“things and words”), but as he goes on to name other works by Foucault,
one must assume he means Les Mots et les choses, the French title of Foucault’s The Order of Things.
  Ecce Homo, trans. Thomas Wayne (Algora Publishing, 2004), p. 49: “it smells offensively Hegelian, only a few
formulas are infected with that old person at a funeral smell of Schopenhauer.”
   See the afterword by Foucault, “The Subject of Power,” in Hubert L. Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow, Michel
Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics (Brighton: Harvester, and Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1982). See Foucault, note 24, p. 147, for an explanation of his systematizing of the pages from The Uses of
Pleasure.
   “On the Genealogy of Ethics” (interview with Foucault conducted in English), in Foucault (ed. Paul Rabinow),
Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth, The Essential Works 1 (New York: The New Press, 1997) p. 264. Deleuze misses a
few words: “Is it natural law, a cosmological order, in each case the same for all living beings?” The last sentence of
the original translation (“Is it the attempt to give your existence the most beautiful form possible?” for “Est-ce un
principe esthétique d’existence?”) has been modified to better fit the context.

                                                                                                                     28

   Deleuze seems to be paraphrasing one of Foucault’s responses in the “Genealogy of Ethics” interview, p. 254.
“One of the numerous reasons I had so much trouble with this book was that I first wrote a book about sex, which I
put aside. Then I wrote a book about the self and the techniques of the self. Sex disappeared, and for the third time I
was obliged to rewrite a book in which I tried to keep the equilibrium between one and the other.”
   The word Foucault uses in “On the genealogy of ethics,” originally in English, is “shift.”
   A phrase seems to have been missed in the English translation – “ne peut accepter de se reconnaître comme objet
dans cette relation qui est toujours pensée dans la forme de la domination.” It has been translated and added back
in.