1

Gilles Deleuze

Painting and the Question of Concepts

Session 6, 19 May 1981

Transcriptions: Voix de Deleuze, Part 1, Nicolas Lehnebach (duration 46 :36); Part 2,
Fatemeh Malekah (duration 46:32); Part 3, Binak Kalludra (duration 37 :12) ; time stamp
and revised transcription, Charles J. Stivale

Translated by Billy Dean Goehring

Part 1

… On the other hand, I’m in a tough spot because I’m of a mind to draw up some very basic
color diagrams [schémas]—actually, that preempts what I’m about to say, but I’m thinking I
won’t have the courage to re-draw them next time, if you know what I mean.

So, if you like, you’ll recall that we were in the middle of our analysis of Egyptian space, but I’ll
make a brief aside on these color diagrams [schémas] which I will need next time, and that’s it.
Then I’ll explain them; that way I won’t have to draw them again. I was an idiot; I started my
drawings and then thought, no! And now that will have to do, you know? At least I won’t have to
do them next time. No, I’ll draw them for you now. That’s what you want, right? Right away. So,
I’m going to go through with it, just to do it all over again [Laughter] —great! [Noise] I’m not
really starting, but it’s true that... [Deleuze does not finish the sentence; there is a brief sequence
of crowd noises, laughter] [Interruption of the recording] [1:39]

… [Pause; Deleuze’s voice is heard away from the microphone, probably next to the
blackboard] As a starting point, you have… and you’ll see it in these two figures: one is an
equilateral triangle, here [Deleuze taps firmly on the board, laughter] the other is a circle… the
former is known as Goethe’s “color triangle”, the other is the so-called color wheel… [Indistinct
words] I’ll try to work through Goethe’s propositions to make sure you can learn something from
this. Apologies to those who already know all this.1

The first proposition: Goethe starts with a very important theme—I mean, if you understand this,
you might understand the whole thing and how it all develops from [indistinct words] … he puts
a lot of emphasis on it and the problems tied to color—he emphasizes the dark side of color.
Color is dark—what does it mean to say that color is dark? It doesn’t mean that he privileges
dark colors; that would miss the point [indistinct words], there are dark colors, but when he talks
about the dark side of color, he clearly has something else in mind. “Color” can be said to have a
dark side, since it is the darkening of light. No doubt it’s also the illumination of black. It is the
darkening of white as well as the illumination of black—and how does it darken white?
Darkened white is yellow, [Pause] and illuminated black is blue. [Pause]

                                                                                                         2

There we have our two so-called primitive or primary colors, yellow and blue. See, here are
yellow and blue in the color triangle—an equilateral triangle which itself breaks down into
equilateral triangles. Say I want to form a color triangle out of equilateral triangles; if I put them
in order, I’d have my two equilateral triangles [Deleuze writes on the board] at both ends of the
base... yellow and blue. [Pause]

Due to the dark aspect of color, darkened light, color is inseparable from movement. You can
sense that this is all really very, very rudimentary, but it’s so Goethe, it’s not surprising that this
book is still a basic text on colors. Color is inseparable from a movement yet to be determined.
You see what he did, it’s already extraordinary, he started with white and black, but he cuts from
white and black, he sort of changes direction. If you take a ray of light in depth and if you take
white and black in depth, you find the whole range of colors sort of spread out, made distinct;
that’s how—I think that Goethe’s deep concern – it is how color spreads out and becomes
distinct from light, in relation to white and black.

And it’s from this dark stage—darkened light, which implies an illuminated black—that all color
unfurls. Initially in the form of yellow and blue, but I think there’s movement that’s already
dynamic. Yellow as darkened light, blue as illuminated black—there’s already a whole dynamic.
What do we call this nascent dynamism? At the point now where—not in terms of white and
black, since there we already have two colors, but in terms of yellow and blue—where the
dynamism of color actually emerges.

Goethe has several names for the dynamism of color: intensification, saturation, darkening. Why
darkening? In light of the dark side of color. [Pause] The intensification of yellow, or its
darkening, into red. It’s a simple experiment: you stack up several layers of yellow. In overlaying
color on color, you have, you can discern, yellow’s dynamic tendency toward red. Thus, you
darken yellow. [Pause]

However—I think there’s something important going on here in Goethe’s work—however, you
also move into red when you soften blue. What do I mean by softening blue? Blue is illuminated
black. If you say that I’m softening blue, you mean that I’m softening the illumination. In other
words, blue softened into black releases a tendency toward red. See how—I mean what’s really
important is how he doesn’t view darkening and illuminating as contradictory. Color has a dark
side. Color’s dark side is at work when you darken yellow no less than when you illuminate blue,
since you’re illuminating an illumination when you illuminate blue.

Thus, the yellow tends toward red as it intensifies; blue tends toward red as it intensifies. What is
pure red (what we would call magenta)?2 It’s—and pay close attention to Goethe’s terminology
here—it’s “fusion,” the point of fusion between yellow and blue. The point of fusion between
yellow and blue at maximum intensification. Which leads us to say that magenta or red—pure
red—is the ideal satisfaction, the fusion, of both colors, yellow and blue, at the point of ideal
satisfaction.

So that’s still… when I made my triangle I could have said: 1, 1’ (one prime) yellow-blue,
starting from light; 2, red as the maximum point of intensification; 3, I mix yellow and blue. I
mix yellow and blue, and I have green. See where red and green aren’t symmetrical. Goethe says

                                                                                                        3

that green is the point of real satisfaction. Red is the point of ideal satisfaction, or the point of
fusion; green is the point of real satisfaction, or mixture. So, I can make my little triangle up-top
red, as the point of maximum intensification, and I can make my little triangle in the middle
green, between yellow and blue.

Green starts it over again. It’s a sort of—the triangle is genetic: that’s the main thing. There’s a
genesis of color in Goethe’s triangle. Green gives us the idea. Green emerged as the combination
of yellow and blue. Now I just have to mix yellow and red, which gives me orange above, in the
triangle up above. Then I just have to mix red and blue, which makes purple. And there, I’ve
generated my six basic colors—I’m highlighting this because often, when you read Goethe,
they’re listed as a function of the image of the color triangle. It’s not just that there are colors: socalled secondary color blends and primary colors—three primary colors: yellow, blue, red; and
three secondary colors: orange, purple, green—that’s not it. I felt like the genesis in Goethe’s
text is really [indistinct word], and that the color triangle expresses this genesis.

In order, you have: the emergence of yellow, the emergence of blue, the twofold emergence of
red via the intensification of both yellow and blue, the emergence of green via mixing, carrying
on mixing through [indistinct word] Imagine if I had colored chalk—that’d be lovely—so,
what’s left? I still have combinations; that will be complicated. That’s the reason why we’ll need
the color wheel later. The combination, yellow – green, here. The combination, green – blue. The
combination, orange – purple. And so, the color triangle is complete.

It's simple but elegant. Once again, I think [one must not read it] as a fully complete triangle. It’s
a genetic triangle. And moreover, you can’t build it up gradually, I think you’re led to construct
it in order -- 1, 1’, 2, 3, 4, 4’, 5, 5’ 5’’… That’s what the color triangle is [indistinct word] You
could add to that: color’s light-dark, white-black exterior, you can see how powerful, now, how
color blooms out of its exterior. That’s the origin of the different colors’ independence; it’s a
genesis. So that would be… and I’d say [indistinct words] … The triangle is genetic. [Pause] So
far, so good? Any issues? As for the color wheel, it is structural [indistinct words] [Pause]

I’m starting with yellow—there’s a reason I’m starting with yellow—I’ll put it at the top of my
circle and from there I’ll establish the first diametric opposition. What is the diametric opposite
of yellow? Yellow is one of the three primitive or primary colors: yellow, blue, red.3 The
opposite of yellow is the combination of the two other primitive colors. Once I have my three
primitive colors—yellow, blue, and red—a diametric opposition would be between one of these
primitive colors and the combination of the other two. This diametric opposition is often known
as the relationship between complementary colors.

What are two complementary colors? Two complementary colors are such that one is a primitive
color, and the other is made by combining the other two. So yellow is diametrically opposed to
the combination of blue and red, or purple. Consequently, if I started to draw my circle—notice
that this circle is not at all genetic. It begins, starting with the problem of diametric opposition; it
begins with drawing a structure. That’s why I think that it’s obvious that the color wheel is
lifeless if you haven’t first worked through the color triangle. [Noises] You can sense that I have
a great preference for the color triangle, a great preference for the color triangle. [Laughter]

                                                                                                       4

Anyway, when it concerns the circle… What? [Someone makes an inaudible remark] So you’ve
got your first diametrical opposition, yellow and purple, purple as the combination of blue and
red forces us to put to our circle -- what you know already, there are six sections, the three
primary colors and the three binary colors – so [indistinct word] blue and red, six sections for the
three primary colors; purple is a combination of blue and red. [Inaudible words] Two other
colors, henceforth through deduction, and here, it’s no longer at all a genesis; it’s a deduction of
structure, it’s a structural deduction whereby you put down your two other sections along the
periphery: blue/yellow with green as the intermediary, yellow/red with orange. And you have,
you can read from there, your diametrical opposition: just as yellow is diametrically opposed to
purple according to the law of complementary colors, red is diametrically opposed to green,
since red is a primitive color diametrically opposed to the combination of the other two: the
combination of the other two is that between yellow and blue, and yellow-and-blue is green. So,
the diametrical opposition between red and green, the diametrical opposition between blue and
orange, since orange is yellow-and-red diametrically opposed with the third primitive color…
Yes? I’m almost done.

One kind of relationship between colors comes about via diametric oppositions along the color
wheel. It’s the theme of complementary colors. Goethe’s dotted line4 suggests that there are other
relationships. The other relationships are when the relations between colors follow along chords
and no longer across the diameter. Diametric oppositions, in Goethe’s terminology which will be
quite influential, are harmonious combinations. Harmonious combinations between yellow and
purple, orange and blue, red and green. They’re the complementary relationships.

We leave diameters behind and consider chords. Two types of chords. You select two colors by
passing over an intermediary. These must be called the big chords. These are what Goethe will
call “characteristic combinations”.5 This is what I’ve written in dashes; the list of characteristic
combinations will be: green – orange, orange – purple. You see you’ve jumped over yellow.
You’ve drawn a chord in the circle such that you’ve brought together green and orange by
skipping yellow. That’s the big chord.

Move onto the second characteristic combination: orange – purple, skipping over red. Third
combination: purple and green, skipping blue. In the other direction: combining blue – red,
skipping purple; red – yellow, skipping orange; blue – yellow, skipping green. And you have
your network of so-called “characteristic” combinations.

And lastly -- what I didn’t include there to keep it from getting too complicated [inaudible
words], but Goethe does include it – what he’ll call, and it’s not by chance and these are of great
importance, what he’ll call non-characteristic combinations.6 [Pause] These are the small chords
[Pause] where you don’t skip colors; you just skip over the intermediary between two colors.
And the non-characteristic combinations include: yellow – orange, orange – red, red – purple,
purple – blue, blue – green, green – yellow. You have your aggregate, your structural aggregate.
What I find interesting is that it’s your choice. I mean the triangle says genetically what the circle
says structurally. In my view, I have my view, the circle is dead, although you might make it
turn… which is important because I’m saying, you sense that it’s not just the theory, it’s the
basis for all theory. It’s not entirely clear that this is adequate; we’ll see that it’s not adequate. In

                                                                                                     5

a sense, was it necessary to wait for Goethe for that? We’ll see the extent to which this topic is
complicated., why it happened at that point in time…, why it happened at that point in time.

I’m saying, in my question, Delacroix made his palette into a real timer, a chromatic timer, a
chrono…, [Pause] a chromatic timer, a chronometer, that is, a clock—you might say that he
wanted to assign hours to the color wheel. That’s why there are so many… it’s already symbolic.
Being necessarily structural, it’s symbolic … [inaudible words; Deleuze starts speaking to
someone near the board] But anyway, you could say the reverse.

A student: [Inaudible comments]

So what Delacroix was doing with all that? It’s very important to put things in order; they were
all very orderly, right? Sometimes, they get photographed in disorderly studios, but that’s
something else. He placed his diametrical colors, and then he surrounded… in a big pile, and
then he surrounded that with derived or blended colors and then that made a chromatic timer.
[Pause] That’s one anecdote… it’d be like exercises. If I were a painter, I’m sure that I’d be
really into that necessarily… [Long interchange with students near the board]

A painter who hates color is a great painter. How, according to these schemas, how can a painter
arrange colors on the palette? That’s the first practical problem. Second practical problem: what
does it mean when a painter hates a color? For example: Mondrian and green [inaudible words]
… abomination. A painter who detests green. That’s one of his main reasons for leaving New
York because New York is the only city in the world where there are no trees…

Claire Parent : That what ?

Hidenobu Suzuki [both next to the microphone] I couldn’t hear.

Claire Parnet: Gilles, we can’t hear over here…

Deleuze: Is that true? What can we do? I’ve almost finished… From the start you haven’t heard
anything?

Claire Parnet: I’d like to know why Mondrian left for New York? [Laughter, noise, indistinct
words]

Deleuze: Because he didn’t like green.

Claire Parnet: But why? New York is the only city in the world that…?

Deleuze: It’s the only city without any trees! [Laughter, noise of diverse conversations] [Long
pause; Deleuze continues chatting away from the microphone]

There are colors missing from the palette. It’s as interesting to ask a painter about the colors that
are missing as about the colors they use. Well, so, you could have all sorts of practical exercises.
When a color is named after a painter… I don’t think it’s based on laws or norms, especially

                                                                                                     6

with the genetic element of colors. That’s how basic decisions are made. What’s more, it’s so
genetic that it has depth, this triangle. [Pause]

But what is its depth? First, it has strata. It’s completely stratified; you have to read it
perpendicularly. If the genetic color triangle had a structure, it’d be a perpendicular structure—
why?

The first stratum: it casts light and darkness. That’s the theme with color’s dark side. And what
proves that color has a dark side? You’ll find it at the level… where this kind of emergence from
white and from black, if you rotate your color wheel, you get gray from white and black, and that
is the deepest stratum—color is emerging from light and darkness.

Then what we should note is that [indistinct words] it isn’t the same space. The space of light
and the space of color are not the same. Color will be… there isn’t any color; that’s what one
means by “chromatic color.” The principle of the relativity of colors, what is it? A color is only
determined in relation to neighboring colors, the color of context. Color is created in this way,
this first stratum casts darkness and light, casts gray, gray being understood as white and black.

The second stratum. It breaks off; it starts to break off from this foundation. Light and dark are
color’s foundation. White and black are the foundation of color, it emerges from this base. It
emerges from this base in the form of yellow, blue, and their shared intensification: red.

At this point, relationships between colors are formed, irreducible to the light-dark relationship.
The light-dark relationship still affects color nevertheless, in the form of light and dark colors.
The light-dark relationship in color will determine the relationship between light and dark colors,
and by no means does it exhaust color relations. It’s what is called “value relations”, value
relations [rapports de valeur]. It’s precisely in the relationship between light and dark colors.
Color only exists through independent relationships, specifically, not between values but
between hues, between colors with the same level of saturation. A perfect example is the
relationship between complements. [Pause]

There are so many strata that… actually, let’s go over a brief history of colorism.7 What is
colorism? These are useful terms. And I’ve come right back to Riegl. Riegl proposed a
distinction between polychromy and colorism. Polychromy refers to any detail or any use of
color— extraordinarily complex and extraordinarily rich—where color is still subordinate to
something else. What do I mean? It can be subordinate to form, to form. You arrange your colors
organically according to the lines of the form. Then you’d have polychromy. Egyptian art and
Greek art are classic examples of polychromy. [Pause]

Color can also be subordinate to light. With painting you actually had to distinguish, if only
vaguely, between a luminist tendency and a colorist tendency. Luminists are those who achieve
color through light, and colorists are those who achieve light through color, through a treatment
of color. Rembrandt, for example, whose works are marvelous, is rightly hailed as among the
greatest luminists. [Pause]

                                                                                                     7

Fine, there isn’t just one possible subordination; I’d say, however, that’s already no longer
polychromy; you see, it’s something else. But it isn’t colorism either, because it isn’t color for its
own sake; it cannot develop in itself… it can realize any value relationship, [but] it can’t fully
develop all of its relationships in tonality or hue.

And with the color wheel, it’s precisely Goethe who strongly emphasizes the following theme:
based on the color wheel, each color—this accounts for why there’s a movement, a dynamism to
color—each color tends to evoke the totality of the color wheel; basically, then, you’d have
coefficients of speed or slowness. Every color suggests the entire color wheel, often via its
diametric opposition in particular. Red will suggest green, and it’s only in your eye that one
complement suggests the other. That famous expression in every introduction to color: you stare
at a color and then, once the color is taken away, your eye suggests the complementary color. For
example, red suggests green.

So, what am I saying? If I were to give a brief overview of the history of colorism: I think that
the moment when the first colorism appears it’s like at the border of luminism; light-color and
problems are combined. That doesn’t mean [indistinct words] one does beyond the other
[indistinct words], and colors come up out from ground. And the ground becomes captivating;
it’s like overlaying two grays. Colors come up out from a ground, from a dark ground. It’s the
famous dark color, which goes through so many developments in the history of philosophy. And
this dark color is now meant to manifest the dark side of all colors, and these emerging, dark
colors are? They are ultimately gray on gray; however, it’s not a gray gray since there is a
luminous gray, a luminist gray from black-white, and a chromatic gray from green-red, two sets
of complementary colors.

So, in an initial colorism, colors indeed emerge from this dark ground, which expresses the
overlay of both grays. As vivid as they are, they demonstrate their dark nature. Starting from
there, all of colorism’s movement, all of colorism’s dynamism will assert itself more and more—
and what will that entail?... [Interruption of the recording] [46:32]

Part 2

… How does one reach this vivacity, expressing the relationship between colors and light? How
does one achieve bright hues, since only bright hues express the relationship between colors? It
will be done in stages.

Just looking at French painting, I’ll use a sequence of three stages, three moments, in Delacroix.
What do we see in Delacroix’s technique? See, because it’s a question of technique. We find
something rather strange: the ground’s dark color often lingers and for a long time, right, it’s
already fully color but dark color—only with Delacroix do we get bright colors. How do we
move beyond this dark color, these dark colors—how do we draw out more vibrant hues? That’s
the crucial moment. It’s always colorism that appears, that reappears; it’s a problem.

And Delacroix invents a process that will be recognized even while he was alive, whether people
mocked him for it or instead used it themselves: it’s the process of using what are called
“crosshatching.” He will literally chop up [hacher] his dark color—there’s no other word for it:

                                                                                                     8

green crosshatching, red crosshatching—and it’s with crosshatching that color will realize its
bright aspects, in bright hues.

One of Delacroix’s greatest moments, “Give me a heap of mud and I will bring out an exquisite
color,” “give me a heap of mud and I will bring out an exquisite color.”8 It’s not like that, it’s not
a literal formula, it’s what he does on the canvas. [indistinct words] What becomes possible after
Delacroix? The unfolding of relations, the unfolding of bright hues and the relationships between
bright hues, in a way that no longer depends on color emerging from a dark ground.

It’s as though Delacroix had kept—well, I’m going a little far with the dialectic, it didn’t occur
like this—it’s as though Delacroix kept it only in order that he’d no longer need it. Which
doesn’t take away, which doesn’t take anything away from his masterpieces built around dark
color. Who’s that? To isolate and heighten the relationship between bright hues without passing
into dark color, dark color—of course, that is the Impressionists.

And that’s perhaps the first time that colorism appears in its pure form: light, completely
subordinate to color. It’s perhaps the second time since there was Turner, Turner with his
yellows There’s a really beautiful, remarkable painting by Turner called “Homage to Goethe”,
since “Homage to Goethe” is like the pictorial version of the chromatic circle. [indistinct words]
For the Impressionists, that’s the problem. By the same token, Delacroix’s crosshatching, which
worked as crosshatching since it was used to chop up [hacher] the base color, the dark color,
what will it become? It became the well-known Impressionist element, the comma-stroke, the
juxtaposition of commas, juxtaposition [indistinct words] no longer crosshatching chopping up
the dark color but little commas on their own.

And well, throughout Impressionism, there are various style when it comes to commas: Monet’s
commas. That’s not… that’s how an expert recognizes [an artist]; sometimes you’re hard-pressed
to distinguish a Pissarro from a Monet, a little bit a lesser Renoir from a Degas. [Pause] An
expert [indistinct words] With the comma, it’s not about that, that there’s a link. When the
comma starts cracking and becomes Van Gogh’s signature … [inaudible words] but Van Gogh’s
comma [indistinct words] understand that in the end, with colorism and the development of
colors for themselves, it’s as if the basic unit of painting delivered itself from a smaller unit, a
kind of atomism. Delacroix’s crosshatching turns into the impressionist comma; the
impressionist comma turns into Cézanne’s little dabs – well, “becomes”, that’s not… -- which
turns into lastly [the sounds of cassette pushed into recorders blocks Deleuze’s voice] the
apparent impact of Seurat’s points, will be transformed into the colorist relationships. [Pause]
And after that… [Pause]

Well, there we are, how well I’m explaining things, right? We’ll let all that marinate. For now,
this is like a long parenthesis that I completed, and we have that accomplished. What we still
need to look at now concerns color, but I didn’t get to it yet so we’ve made progress, and now
I’ll come back to something else, but this is fine, that’s what I’ll need… [Interruption of the
recording] [54:30]

[After an apparent break, Deleuze has returned to his seat near the microphone] …You see, the
colors aren’t good. It’s a very nice triangle. [Pause, noises of students returning]

                                                                                                       9

Okay, well, see: that’s a parenthesis we could put before or after; everything else, it’s something
to take home with you, okay? You can read more about this in Goethe, right? I’d rather you read
it, but if you don’t read it... fine, fine, that’s… Well, are there any comments, additions?

A student: White and black, [indistinct words] I read Goethe’s text, and it’s very complicated
problem, because on the one hand, there are color[s]; he says, white is the first, the first genesis
of darkness, and black is the essence of darkness, so they are colors; but at the same time, he
challenges Newton on the question of white which is born from the color wheel. Goethe says:
not at all, that white cannot be generated from the color wheel; that’s gray.

Deleuze: Absolutely.

The student: And this ambiguity that—

Deleuze: Personally, I think that the ambiguity is easily accounted for; it’s what I was getting at
when I said that the triangle should be interpreted genetically. Then color doesn’t actually have
an absolute beginning—rather, at the same time, white and black are both the milieu for the
exteriority of color, the form of color’s exteriority, which doesn’t yet have any color inside, and
the emergence of the inside. Especially since what he reproaches Newton for, among other things
then it’d get complicated; we would have to, if we really focused on color, we would indeed
have to pit everything in Goethe against Newton.

Anne Querrien: Newton, for me… I feel like he was using the laws of optics, decomposing light
through the prism and…

Deleuze: Completely, right.

Anne Querrien: And I mean, on that alone, you’ll find some pop science books on color, the idea
that the eye’s three primary colors [are]—and it’s what was used in television—red, green, and
blue and as for television, I have the equation here for its wavelengths: it’s just about 51% red,
39% green, and 10% blue, and so according to the color triangle, that puts television over
completely on the black side.

Deleuze: Yes, yes, it gets pushed over.

Anne Querrien: … pushed over to black, and on the other hand, a big article in the Sunday Le
Monde—a fascinating article on how color images in television are coded to ensure that color
broadcasts are compatible with black-and-white receivers, and well, they subtract color instead
of adding it—and so pull it even further towards black, so that black-and-white receivers can
pick up color broadcasts.

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes. [Deleuze’s tone is less than enthused, hence laughter all around him]

Anne Querrien: So then, one would have to compare techniques because it seems that the
development of chiaroscuro emerges at the same time as color printing and the additive

                                                                                                  10

composition of colors in printing, and Delacroix and company are completely parallel to the
research on half-toning in photography.

Deleuze: Or Seurat’s method, right, in pointillism, would be another technical comparison to
draw with punctual coding …

Anne Querrien: And photography in color …

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes. [Pause] Well, okay, let’s keep going… Yes, another comment?

The first student: Another thing, about the nine chromatic cycles…

Deleuze: A numerical correspondence.

The student: Except for nine, okay, we have three for the three colors, we have six, and now we
can’t have nine and go on directly to…, and if we keep on separating them—

Deleuze: Let’s see.

The student: Whereas in the other—

Deleuze: We have three… In the other…

The student: In the other, we have nine.

Deleuze: Oh, you mean in the triangle! Yeah, that’s interesting.

The student: Yes, it’s important that we get nine.

Deleuze: It’s important!

The student: …that we get nine, yes.

Deleuze: Well, aren’t you an abstract mystic! [Laughter]

The student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Yes, it’s important, but we should… I can’t keep up because I’m totally wiped out. We
can only get… With the wheel, don’t we get…? So, three, three… -- Oh, this is really beyond
me -- Think on this; it’s an exercise: how we might get nine with the color wheel. [Pause] Yes,
even though it’s clear in the triangle—oh! You could maybe untangle a great mystery. Look!
Well, [Pause] we’ll set that aside for now, but again: we’re going to need it soon. [Pause]

Do you remember the point we reached? We had just defined our first signal-space, the Egyptian
space. But at the same time, this Egyptian signal-space wasn’t made for painting, or at any rate,
it certainly wasn’t exclusive to painting. It’s even expressed formally, infinitely more clearly, in

                                                                                                    11

Egyptian bas-relief. And my first question along these lines is: Won’t this establish something
long-term, something essential about painting? Won’t it establish something long-term that’s
essential about painting, namely, the idea of flatness?9 Because, look, many critiques have
specifically defined painting in two ways—take [Clement] Greenberg for example, a
contemporary critic I’ve already talked about. He says that painting consists in two things:
flatness and the determination of flatness. That itself is interesting because what does that
mean—the determination of flatness as distinct from flatness. Flatness and the determination of
flatness. Okay, maybe, maybe but it’s not so self-evident that painting is defined by flatness.

I mean, isn’t there a thickness to the canvas? [It’s] why some—and not all—there are some
painters who even revolve around there being thickness to the canvas. Wouldn’t this idea of
painting as flatness and the determination of flatness in part come from a very old horizon in
painting, the Egyptian horizon, an Egyptian achievement? Why? Because we saw if we try to
define Egypt’s signal-space, according to Riegl, we more or less get the following formula: form
and ground are taken on the same plane, flatness—i.e., an equal flatness of form and ground.
Form and ground are taken on the same plane, both equally close to each other and equally close
to ourselves. That’s what it is – if I try to sum up the presentation of Egypt according to Riegl –
that’s what it is: form and ground are taken on the same plane, both equally close to each other
and equally close to ourselves. That’s Egyptian bas-relief -- and we saw how it could be equally
true for pyramids, in a more complicated way -- and that’s Egyptian painting.

Yes, we’ll have to hang onto this idea of “flatness.” Perhaps it’s Egypt that realized painting as
flatness. And then this theme, he developed from there, but it didn’t have any of the same
urgency. Again, it doesn’t go without saying that a canvas is flat. After all, there are some, there
are some painters who paint backwards; many painters today paint backwards. What does
painting backwards mean, if not that the canvas has thickness? There are painters who
problematize the idea of surface. There’s a group—there’s a very important group, the
Supports/Surfaces group,10 and then still other groups, a group that many Americans haven’t
stopped problematizing it. But we’ll leave all that aside.

Flatness won’t so much be the necessary outcome of painting as it will be painting’s Egyptian
horizon, painting’s external Egyptian horizon. And indeed, that is what Egyptian space is. Is this
the expression of a will to art, as Riegl puts it, or is it tied to -- then it’s all fair game, we can
always dream -- is it tied to certain conditions of both civilization and nature, right, the desert,
bas-relief’s relationship to the desert, the pyramid’s relationship to the desert, the eye’s
relationship to the desert? Doesn’t this relationship specifically imply of planning of space?11

Because, in fact, I’m hitting on something I didn’t get to say last time, when Riegel tries to say
what sort of vision corresponds to Egyptian space. See, on the side of the object—I’m just
summarizing here— on the object side, there’s indeed an operation of planning; the relationships
in space are transformed into planimetric relationships. Well, form and ground are on the same
plane, it’s linearity and, like [Greenberg] says, [the determination]12 of linearity, that is, what
determination of linearity will result from the fact that form and ground are taken on the same
plane?

                                                                                                    12

Coming back to what we covered last time: the determination of linearity that results from this
involves three elements of painting. It’s the three laws of painting precisely because form and
ground are taken on the same plane, inhabit the same plane, that painting will have three
elements: ground, form, and what relates ground to form and form to ground, namely the
geometrical crystalline contour. The geometrical crystalline laws [légalité]. And I said that when
we look, when we happen to look at a modern canvas, and are in a situation such that we—it’s
like we’re forced, subjected, led to distinguish three elements: form, ground, and contour—then
we can say, “An Egyptian’s been here!” [Laughter]

I’m thinking of a painting, and maybe some of you know it off the top of your head, can see it in
your mind—it’s a beautiful painting, I think, really very beautiful! A painting by [Paul] Gauguin:
La Belle Angèle, La Belle Angèle. What a painting!13 It’s a very fine example—and in my
opinion, it might be one of the first examples in modern painting—of what’s called—I tried to
put it in broad strokes—shallow depth, limited depth. There is depth but it’s very, very limited;
form and ground are really close to the same plane. What is the form? It’s the head of a Breton
named Angèle—one Gauguin was fond of: a real Breton! [Laughter] She’s depicted with her
headdress. She’s perfect. Okay. Anyway.

What is the ground? It’s—and this says it all—a field; it’s a field.14 With what we’re given it’s
not clear who invented it; the letters are murky. Is it Van Gogh? Is it Gauguin? Well, it doesn’t
really matter who. Or was it another third member of their group? They made fields, but still—to
liven them up—they put bouquets of flowers, like on wallpaper. They put little bouquets of
flowers. There’s a… Van Gogh was close to a postman in Arles. And he made several portraits
of this postman. There’s one of those—very, very fine—where the ground comprises a field like
wallpaper. It’s green, if memory serves. [https://www.peintures-tableaux.com/Portrait-dufacteur-Joseph-Roulin-2-Vincent-van-Gogh.html] Because he made several. There’s a blue
one—one with a blue field. There’s a green one. And I think the green one has really charming
little bouquets of flowers! Which weave a decorative motif onto the field. Anyway. There’s the
field, then. There’s the form. What is it? The form is the head of the Breton. And she is clearly
not treated as a field.

There’s still one problem. You’ll notice that it runs throughout the history of painting. When it
comes to colorism, what do you do about flesh? It’s right here, bizarrely, that painting and
phenomenologists come together, because both are so animated by the question of flesh, by
embodiment. It was the problem of flesh that led [Maurice] Merleau-Ponty to painting.15

What do you do about flesh? I tracked down a quote from Goethe, just to tie everything
together...oh! Where is that quote? A very nice quote from Goethe—Here it is: “For flesh, the
color should be totally liberated from its elementary state.”16 Flesh poses an odd problem for
painting. How do you make flesh without winding up with gray? If there is a case—even in the
case, even in the case of impressionism, flesh is even more of a problem. How do you depict
flesh? Things are no big deal, but flesh doesn’t exactly give off much light, you know! How do
you prevent flesh from getting muddy? It’s tough! You need to treat color in a particular way.
So, it’s incredible in La Belle Adèle—no, Angèle—in La Belle Angèle. Yes, La Belle Angèle. La
Belle Angèle, since you have two color treatments corresponding to your first two pictorial
elements.

                                                                                                   13

Naturally, it wasn’t like that with the Egyptians; that’s why it’s a great modern painting. You
have one way of treating flesh And I’m jumping to… I’m foreshadowing because… Finally, one
major solution to treating flesh, to treating flesh pictorially, is using what’s called broken color;
it’s by breaking the color. What is broken color? Well see later on, won’t we! It doesn’t matter,
here we’re situating a word, a new category in color; broken color is how Van Gogh and
Gauguin, for example, treat flesh. Yet, alright. Alright. So, you have the use of broken color, the
form, the figure, the use of color fields, the ground’s treatment, you have your two elements.

And Gauguin uses a method that a guy, unfortunately a minor—well, not unfortunately!—a
minor painter in Gauguin’s day tried to bring back, and this painter called it “cloisonné.”17
You’ll find it in La Belle Angèle: the figure is surrounded by a sort of yellow circle that’ll be
very important—for starters, this yellow circle unquestionably has a comic effect. Gauguin had a
real sense of humor, visually; he’s one of the most lighthearted painters, the most… yes,
painting’s comic. And when it’s bracketed off in cloisonné, La Belle Angèle starts to look like a
head on a cheese tin, on the side of a cheese tin; it’s cropped like she’s a Breton mascot for
Camembert—that’s just Gauguin, instead of… Well. And this yellow, this yellow line, is great
because, really, that’s what brings out the figure’s broken color and the ground’s color field [ton
aplat]. And there’s a kind of… And at the same time that’ll be a crucial component of shallow
depth, that is, it’ll establish the form and ground “almost” at the same plane.

So, when you see a painting like this—or I mentioned Bacon which is actually very different—
but when… when, in the large, large majority of Bacon’s paintings, you’ll find three elements
that stand out. They aren’t all necessarily like this. The three elements are: a field for the ground;
second, the figure is always done in broken colors; and the autonomous contour, or what refers
the form to the ground and the ground to the form, which in Bacon is no longer mere cloisonné
with its volume, its surface or volume—it’s kind of a rug—in the color-relationships with the
grounding field, with the field of color. You might say there are three colors in Bacon that form a
sort of rug or ring in the middle of which—or inside, at least—the figure is contained or propped
up. Such that you get three regimes of color: a contour regime, secured by the rug or ring; the
ground’s regime secured by the field; a figure regime secured by the broken colors; and these
three regimes work together; you can declare: homage to Egypt.

But this kind of return to Egypt is clearly a return to Egypt via thoroughly non-Egyptian means,
since now we find the three Egyptian elements again in different approaches to color. And
maybe you see what he [Greenberg] meant by linearity and the determination of linearity:18 the
Egyptians provide for linearity, or the identical plane shared by both form and ground, and
thereby determine this linearity with three elements: form, ground, and autonomous contour.
Well, if you’ve understood that, and that the Egyptians didn’t settle it, and that it can live on only
if a modern painter can recover it and resurrect Egypt via non-Egyptian means—then you’ve
understood generally what happens every time, what happens all the time in art.

As a result, to wrap up our history of Egypt, there’s just, there’s a lot we should, at the end, we
should talk about still, but it’s fine -- there’s one last thing to be done: as regards the subject,
what’s going on? We’ve defined the objective elements: the same plane for the form and ground;
the three elements constituting the determination of flatness: the ground field, the form, the bas-

                                                                                                   14

relief figure; and the contour, once again, the geometrical crystalline contour, the geometrical
crystalline law [légalité] that carries the form to the ground.

So, what stays in your eye, your Egyptian eye—it goes without saying that Egyptians have lost
this eye and that today’s Egyptians no longer have this eye [Pause] unless they do have it, I don’t
know… after all… well, anyway, yes [Pause] yes, yes, yes, yes, the eye… That’s how Riegl
defines the Egyptian eye, but you’ll see that the Egyptian eye can only be defined according to
its correlate, that is according to Egypt’s signal-space. What is the Egyptian eye?

And so, in the first edition of Riegl’s crucial text, Art Industry -- Late Roman Art Industry -- we
find something difficult, something very simple but which comes across as difficult. The first
edition tells us, sure! Yeah, this Egyptian space is a closed-in space; it invites a close-up view.
No, that’s not shocking. You might think that’s not really artistically motivated: it’s because of
the desert and light that one’s view is fundamentally drawn in; in Egypt, you look quite closely.

A student from outside: Excuse me… [Inaudible comments; her remarks concern an official
action at the university level requiring that students sign some kind of form]

Deleuze: Where do we drop them off?

The student: [Room] C 196.

Deleuze: So, fill them out at the end, okay?

The student: [Inaudible comments]

Deleuze: What’s that? Oh! Yes, yes—

The student: [Inaudible comments]

Deleuze: It’s alright; the meetings are everyone’s concern. You don’t know about the meetings?
Oh! That’s my fault; I should have told you. Yes, yes, you know the dates? Oh dear.

The student: There’s a committee room.

Deleuze: … And that we’ve yet to see, in teaching, it’s true; I’d like a newsletter with updates on
late-stage proposals for everyone in their respective fields to up-to-speed with proposals that are
already far along—for example, the university project was catastrophic. It’s not hard to
understand. The university project consisted in bypassing university councils.19 Well, our kneejerk reaction is always that no one gives a shit about the university council! But hold on, what
will you replace it with? And what about contacting the EBU—I mean, credits would have been
distributed directly to the EBU. Which, clearly, hands regional unions—who are also
complacent—absolutely put them in the ministry’s hands, because there was no longer any
university structure. Now that was a terrible proposal.

                                                                                                          15

So, any time I talk to somebody in a given field, oddly enough, they confirm it. I saw not long
ago, I saw -- he didn’t tell me any secrets -- I saw a banker, and he said, you know, there was a
plan to blow up banks’ collective bargaining agreements—a very late-stage proposal. But it
would be very interesting… -- [Deleuze reacts here to a student’s remark] yes, but that occurred
in context of the banks, in a particular way -- it’d be interesting to get a rundown so that we
know advanced proposals that’d go into effect one or two years from now. But for me, that’s
what elections are for. What were they plotting? This is no joke!

The student: General Assembly—you have the floor.

Deleuze: That’s true; that’s why I’m thinking if these meetings...

The student: …that’s how we found out about it, at 10 pm… that’s why we’ve decided to take
action… so if you want to respond… Goodbye.

Deleuze: Okay, then. Goodbye. To reiterate: Yes, it won’t do if only professors show up to these
meetings. Everyone who is able to go has to… You should look into it. Personally, I think it’s
Friday or Saturday, but you—you think it’s Thursday… At any rate, you all have to go, have to
show up with numbers. Because it’s important: to redirect—at present there is still a small
chance to salvage something from everything that’s… yes, so normally, as I see it, it’s Friday
and Saturday. Look! I’ll stop there, alright, and we’ll take a break since we’ve had enough!
[Class continues without break] Listen to me! [Some students try to quiet the ones still arguing]

Claire Parnet: Ah, what a chatterbox she is! Anne, shut up!

Deleuze: He [Riegl] is trying to say what sort of eye corresponds to Egyptian space. And I told
you that in the first edition, he says, well! It’s very strange: it’s a near-sighted vision, then, it’s
near-sighted vision but how does the near-sighted eye behave? Well! He says, it’s bizarre, but
literally, see, form and ground both occupy the same plane, and I—the viewer, with my eye—
I’m just as close. It’s an eye that literally acts like touch. It’s a tactile eye. It’s a tactile eye.

And here Riegl—it’s a little—anyway, what we need to see, what we get from this passage in
Riegl, is that it’s not a metaphor, that moreover, Riegl is pointing out two of the eye’s functions:
you have optical vision, and you have tactile vision. The eye as an eye is not—see, the tactile eye
isn’t an eye that’s supplemented with touch, like when I use my hands to confirm something I’ve
seen, when I touch a face, for example—that’s not what it is. It’s the eye as such that acts like
touch, so this passage from Riegl is still ambiguous, and it’s just—it’s bizarre. It’s in the second
edition that he comes out and says that we should distinguish—indeed, he has to coin a
complicated word to avoid equivocating—and he says there are like two visions: there’s optical
vision and there’s vision that he calls “haptic,” h-a-p-t-i-c, haptic vision. He borrows the word
from the Greeks: hapto, which means to touch, the eye’s touch, a haptic sense of sight.20

So, we’ll define the haptic sense of sight, if we want to give it a real sense, the haptic sense of
sight would be a use of sight that’s no longer optical—no longer vision from a distance. See,
optical sight is from a distance, relatively speaking; however, the haptic use of vision, or haptic

                                                                                                    16

sight, is a close-up sight that grasps form and ground on the same equally close plane. Well let’s
suppose, then, before you we take a break, I’m thinking—there are a lot of problems here!

We’ll keep this word, haptic; after all, these categories, these categories, it might be really
interesting because painting is intended for the eye, right, it’s intended for the eye! But which
eye? I might suggest that painting perhaps gives rise to an eye within the eye—that painting,
okay, might literally have something to do with the so-called third eye. Would we have two
optical eyes, two eyes for optical vision, and then a third eye? A third haptic eye? As a result, is
it painting that produces the haptic eye? Is there a haptic eye outside of painting? I’m jumping
ahead, that’s no longer the Egyptians. See, it’s knowing whether this talk of “the haptic” will do
anything for us. And what would this haptic eye be?21

Anyway! Let’s reconnect with everything we’ve covered today. Look. Light—light is the optical
eye; light solicits an optical eye, perhaps. I don’t know. Maybe we could say that. But doesn’t
color belong to a whole other eye? Isn’t it a whole other eye? Doesn’t color solicit a haptic eye?
Wasn’t all that earlier about how a haptic eye is reconstituted out of the optical eyes?

In a spirited letter, Gauguin says, “The painter’s eye is in heat”— I don’t remember what page,
but it when it comes up it’s pretty funny.22 What is the painter’s eye? This eye, which Cézanne
himself claims turns all red, so red, so red—I come back home and my eyes are red, so red that I
can’t see anymore. Eyes so red they can’t see anything: the painter’s eye, Gauguin’s eye in
heat—it’s really bizarre. Isn’t this a really very strange kind of vision? Isn’t it the reconstitution
of a haptic eye, the Egyptian eye, the third eye, right?

I’m saying “third eye” not because it’s in the brain. It isn’t in the brain; it’s in the nervous
system, but only because, I mean, it’s in the middle of the two other eyes. That’s where the
painter is. But then, is color — I don’t know, let’s take it as far as we can — wouldn’t color be a
totally independent and original way of reconstituting haptic sight that the Egyptians had
achieved in an entirely different way? The Egyptians created haptic vision by placing form and
ground on the same plane and by producing three elements: form, ground, and geometrical
crystalline contours. But, for us, hasn’t an Egyptian eye been recovered through non-Egyptian
means, namely, through colorism? Isn’t the haptic eye the eye that draws from an optical
external milieu – light, white and black —the inherent relationships of color?

Alright, we’ve wound up with all sorts of questions left hanging, because now we stumble upon
the question: The Egyptian world appears to be dead; it can only be resurrected via totally
independent means. What made the Egyptian world die off? Ah! What brought it to an end?
[Pause; someone answers from the back and Deleuze starts laughing] I’m always bad about
posing abstract questions, and well, I’ll tell you, what caused the Egyptian world to die…
[Deleuze keeps laughing; another student makes a comment] Sure, you might say that. You
might put it another way. Okay, go take a break. Take a break. [Interruption of the recording]
[1:33:02]

Part 3

                                                                                                      17

… A lot of you during our break, a lot of you have been saying that you’ve been feeling sick and
tired with this weather… I should just cave in and shorten class [cheers and applause], there we
are! So, I’d just like to try to determine, see, we’re trying to find out what this spatial event is, or
rather this determination; I’ll stick to the expression “linearity” and the “determination of
linearity.” Again, we saw it for Egyptian space. “Linearity” is the plane. “Determination of
linearity” is the plane’s three elements: ground, form, and contour.

I mean, what’s causing this space to be somehow overturned!? Once again, this space will be so
overturned that you’ll only be able to find traces of Egypt using means that are completely—It’ll
be a resurrected Egypt. So, what could happen? If we stay there, we leave Riegl (or we’ll come
back to him, at least) but there we’ll pose ourselves a question—and as always, like I’m always
trying to show you, in a way, we don’t have a choice—what might happen in this flat space
where form and ground occur at the same plane as the three elements?

What’s the accident? Accidents are accidents. Events are events. But what is accident and what
is event? The spatial determination of the accident or event is exactly this. You have your
Egyptian space—well look! Bas-relief. However slight, it’s like an earthquake. It causes an
earthquake. That is, the plane splits up; imagine that the plane splits up—but the aftermath, it’s
insane! The plane splits up, a foreground draws in, a background pulls back, even if only
slightly. Disjunction of planes. Really, a disjunction of planes. From there—from there, anyway,
it’ll be fixed—there will be a foreground and there will be a background. And it’s no big deal, as
small as it is. The disjunction of planes; that’ll be what brings us to other signal-spaces.

And after all, if I have a disjunction between planes, what does that give us—so we’re really
speeding through uh—what can come of it? A space where planes are disjointed, and which is
essentially organized around the foreground. That’s the first possibility -- I’m trying to think
through the possibilities -- this is the signature of this space: there’s a distinction between planes,
but it’s determined by the foreground [avant-plan]. I’m still using the concept of determination.

So that’s great, that’ll be great, this foreground-determined space. Then why not the other way
around? Let’s think of a background-determined space. Well that, you say, no—that’s what we
want whenever there’s something new, that’s what we want because that sounds great—a
background-determined space. Why isn’t it the opposite? Let’s break it down — a backgrounddetermined space. We say: no, really, it’s that one we want – each time, there’s something new --
it’s that one we want, a background-determined space. Just consider this: everything emerges
from the ground, comes from the ground. So much power compared to the foreground-space!
Form comes out of the ground in the most energetic sense of the word, while on the flip-side,
when the fore-ground is predominant, the form sinks into the ground and determines its own
relation to the ground—while here, form literally stems from the ground when the background is
determinant. Ah, that must be a beautiful space—before being sure of it, I’m looking for logical
positions for my spaces.

And what else can there be when the planes are disjointed? There might be a third thing. It’s
funny—something very, very winding. As the planes are disjointed, you don’t worry so much
about the planes themselves, neither the foreground [avant plan] nor the background [arrière
plan]. We’ll generate everything between the two planes. But what’s between the two, and what

                                                                                                     18

can be between them if it’s not dependent on either the foreground or the background? I see
three positions—logically, there are three.

But all, let’s try to pin down some names. What about this artistic space where the foreground is
determinant? So, there’s volume—volume since the planes are disjointed. Anyway, you see that
it’s the end of the Egyptian world since volumetric relations have been liberated from
planimetric relations. There is volume, but what’s determinant is the foreground, because it’s the
foreground that contains the form, and the relationship to the background is determined by the
form and by how the background takes shape in the foreground.

We’ll all recognize this as Greek art. Take a Greek sculpture—it’s a rare example; I’ll still try to
illustrate it clearly, but I like starting with a purely abstract schema. Not in order to apply it, but
because I’d like to demonstrate something right away, the highs and lows of Greek sculpture.

What are the highs—the reliefs, brilliant reliefs. The Greeks had words for a sculpture’s highs
and lows, and the lows are the hollows—the hollows and the shadows and the whole sculpture
has different levels, and that’s how the art is evaluated: Greek harmony entails the variable
distribution of highs and lows in equal measure. It’s the highs in the reliefs that are determinant
in Greek sculpture, that is, it’s in the foreground where form is worked out, and working out the
form determines the relationship with the background.

It’s an aesthetic space of the foreground where it’s the form that’s determinant. And [Henri]
Maldiney puts it well when discussing this in his book, Gaze Speech Space23 : It’s wrong—oh so
wrong—wrong to say that the Greek world is the world of light. It’s not the world of light
because light is strictly subject to form’s requirements. Sure, it’s the world of light, but nonliberated light, light subject to form; light ought to reveal form and submit to the requirements of
form. And all Greek sculpture is this way of handling light, this wonderful way of handling light
in the service of form. No longer the haptic world of the Egyptians—it’s an optical world, only
an optical world where light’s in the service of form; it’s an optical world that still refers back to
tactile form: it’s a tactile-optical world.

And that’s why Riegl defines Greek art as tactile-optical art with a corresponding space: the
primacy of the foreground over the background. Which results in what’s likely the most
profound conception of art as rhythm or harmony, rhythm and harmony in the Greek sense and
not in the modern sense. But we’ll get to that. From one revolution to the next, imagine the
reverse: I hope you’ll be convinced if you look at Greek sculpture, but the same holds for all of
Greek art. Light — not at all —light is subordinate to the cube’s requirements, and the cube is
the sort of environment particular to the foreground. It is form on two planes: there is a depth,
there are shadows, there are lights, and all of that has to submit to the rhythm of the form, since
the rhythm is form.

Well, so it’s not at all a world of light—that’ll have to wait; it’s a serious problem because, see,
it’ll ultimately force us, next time it’ll force us to really reconsider our conventional
understanding of the Greek world.

                                                                                                   19

Moving on to yet another revolution, what happened that could have reversed the Greek
relationship such that the background becomes the determinant ground and that the form, the
figure, springs from the ground? But it’s a very different sort of figure when it springs out of the
ground. It took what amounts to—look, we always talk about the Copernican revolution, and
these revolutions are even more important, or at least just as important as the Copernican
revolution. To say that Egyptian space gives way to a space determined by the foreground is just
as consequential as saying whether the Earth revolves around the Sun or the Sun revolves around
the Earth. It’s about reversing the structure of space, let alone a second reversal where it’s the
ground, where everything comes from the ground.

Yeah, everything comes from the ground; that’s how it is. How do you expect form to have the
same bearing when it’s determined by the foreground -- even if it’s only responding to the
background -- as when, on the other hand, it’s literally projected by the background? By no
means is it the same conception of form. When the background becomes determinant, where
does the figure come from—it comes directly out of light and shadow. In other words, the space
of the background is a space where light and shadow are liberated from form. Now it’s form that
depends on the distribution of light and shadow. It’s a radical reversal of Greek space.

Who is responsible for this? That’s why it’s so sad, because it seems that we no longer
understand it—even books on this start off by associating this with Greek space, when it’s the
opposite of Greek space. So, there are similarities—obviously, there are similarities—but it’s
Byzantine space. Byzantine art’s great place in art history is by no means due to this alone, but its
hallmark is having the figure emerge from the background instead of determining the figure as a
form in the foreground. This time, light is set loose—shadow even more so—the Byzantines are
the first colorists, since liberating light from form isn’t too far from liberating color. And the
Byzantines are the first, I think, the first in art to manipulate both color scales: the luminous
scale, in value, and the chromatic scale, in color [tons].24

And the Byzantines even had three primary colors: gold, blue, red—the three well-known mosaic
colors—with complex relationships to white (as in marble) and black (as so-called “smalt”),
which grow and form a kind of framework through the relationships between colors, and the first
luminists, just like the first colorists, i.e., giving up polychromy for colorism and luminism, that
will be Byzantine. That warranted persecution, as the emperor will end up persecuting these
artists.

Well, this history—if you consider the opposition between Greek space and Byzantine space—
this isn’t a linear historical development. If I’m looking for another sequence (this time
painting/painting), this is perfect. Just picture a Byzantine figure: everything has to emerge from
the ground because the mosaic is in a niche. It’s a far-sighted vision; it’s far-sighted vision from
the viewer’s perspective. Far-sighted vision—mosaic is embedded in a niche, and you get these
figures eaten up by eyes. It isn’t form that defines the figure. What is it? Form answers to light; it
answers to shadow and light. The eyes of a Byzantine figure are everywhere there—or the eyes
spread to anywhere these gazes up from the ground do. It’s the very antithesis to the Greek
world. And it might be one of the most beautiful spaces—really there’s no better or worse—but
really, Byzantine space is… if you compare it to Greek space, it’s the exact opposite of Greek
space.

                                                                                                  20

Alright. I’m looking for a sequence in painting—There’s another guy, just like how I singled out
Riegl, there’s a major figure in the history of painting named [Heinrich] Wölfflin. It’s translated
in French—a rather good book—on the 16th-17th centuries. But he obviously read Riegl because
among other things, we find, moving from the 16th to the 17th century—his analyses are very
thorough, very detailed—moving from the 16th to the 17th century we leave behind the 16th
century’s still tactile-optical vision. First, it was something else. First, I’m looking at the short
transition between the 16th and the 17th century. We move away from tactile-optical vision—
that of [Albrecht] Durer, or Leonardo [Da Vinci]. So that already involves a lot of variation; I’m
not saying that it’s the same space, but in a way it all belongs to a tactile-optical space.

And in the 17th century a kind of key or major revolution starts to take shape which will be the
discovery of a purely optical space. The discovery of a pure space that culminates with
Rembrandt, for example, but plenty of others beside. But with these two spaces—16th century
space and 17th century space—what comes first, as the first determination? The primacy of the
foreground… if you can think of something by Leonardo da Vinci or Raphael, you’ll see it right
away. Yet with one remarkable innovation—Raphael, for example—the foreground is curved.
Wonderful curve, and a wonderful discovery only possible thanks to the primacy of the
foreground.

I think… let me clarify, since there are some things I’m taking from Wölfflin that are so great,
and then there are some things that… well, this a bit of a tangent, but around the 16th century
there’s a wonderful discovery and it was the same, I think, as what the Greeks discovered. What
discovery? Well, it’s… I don’t like it, but I don’t have a better word: it’s “the collective line.”
You can really see the contrast, with the Egyptian line. The Egyptian line is fundamentally
individual; indeed, it’s the contour of individual form. That the collective is able to take on form
is an idea that… that didn’t occur to Egyptians. In other words, for an Egyptian, an individuality
can get stronger and stronger, but it’s always structured as an individuality. Collectivity as such
doesn’t… that starts with the Greeks.

What do you find in Greek art? You get the invention of a line that no longer coincides with thisor-that individual, a line that encompasses several individuals. There aren’t real lines anymore:
it’s the contour of the ensemble. The invention of the collective line means that the line becomes
the contour of an ensemble. The Apostles, for example: of course, they’re still individualized, but
that’s not the point. What matters is the enveloping line that goes from the left-most Apostle to
the right-most Apostle. I’m thinking of a famous painting, The Miraculous Draught of Fishes, by
Raphael.

Well, in my opinion it seems obvious, but we’re no longer there, think about how the collective
line can be made specifically—it’s the line of the foreground. It’s specifically—it can only be
identified via the foreground, as if the fact that the foreground has become determinant allows us
to overcome the individual limits of form. Whereby what takes on form—and that’s insane from
an Egyptian perspective—from a Greek perspective, what takes on form? In Greek statues it’s an
ensemble, even if it’s only a couple. You know right away I can imagine the objection: but there
are plenty of solitary figures—sure! We shall see. Well, no matter. Anyway, couples in Greek
statues: great! The line is the contour shared by two individualities.

                                                                                                     21

And what develops in 16th century painting? Leonardo da Vinci’s collective line, or Raphael’s
collective line. They aren’t the same. You can tell painters apart by their collective line, their
style of collective line. Something remarkable emerges with 16th century painting: a tree has a
collective line that doesn’t depend on its leaves, and the painter has to render the collective line
in the foreground. A flock of sheep has a collective line, both flocks of sheep and groups of
Apostles; group-painting literally moves downstage, overwhelms the foreground. Yet that
appears to be just as true for Greek art as for 16th century art, but in entirely different conditions.

On that note, there’s something that stands out throughout—or very often—in Leonardo da
Vinci’s writings, where he says: “Form must not be surrounded by lines.”25 Read that way, we
risk of running into a contradiction because the sentence can be understood in two different
ways, one of which Leonardo did not intend. You might think that it means that form should be
free of lines. That’s not what he means. Why not? Because the line’s primacy is indisputable for
him. Besides, what is a form free of lines? It’s form subordinate to light and to color. Yet that’s
obviously not what da Vinci means. I think his writings and context make it clear that he means
form shouldn’t be contained by lines; it means that form exceeds the line of individuality. Form
exceeds individual lines. But form will be determined by the line of the foreground.

Hence why it matters that Raphael starts to bend the foreground, like some kind of balcony,
where the foreground itself is curved. That’s one of the great achievements, the real
achievements, of this period. But see, when it comes to space, I’d say the same thing goes for
both 16th century art and Greek art; it’s like they change signals.

The primacy of the foreground and the discovery of the collective line. Byzantium and the 17th
century thus switch signals: the background has primacy, unleashing light and even color. But
with the unleashing of light, everything comes from the ground [fond]. And that’s what 17th
century painting is all about. And it’s so obvious, for example—I have something really simple
in mind, a theme in the 16th century—it’s well known, everyone’s pointed it out—the 16th
century theme: Adam and Eve. It’s also one of Wölfflin’s examples. Adam and Eve, standing
side by side. It could be very complicated since this foreground is the foreground. It might be a
curved space; it could be a curving foreground.

What perspective is famous in the 17th century? Diagonal. It’s as if—if you will—there’s no
more foreground. Of course, there is one, but it’s not what counts. It’s like the foreground was
punched out; it was punched out by a depth that drags the left toward… drags it toward or pulls it
from the ground [fond], pulls the right from the ground.

There’s no more foreground [avant-plan]; there’s a differentiation based on the ground [fond].
It’s clear, for example, in a great painting by Rubens that depicts the meeting of two people. In
the 16th century they’d meet in the foreground and their meeting would take place in the
foreground. Not at all with Rubens. Between the two meeting, there’s practically an alleyway
between them, made up of other people on other planes. So that each of the two meeting in the
foreground—both of them—comes from the ground by differentiating, highlighting the alleyway
separating them. They meet in the foreground, but only inasmuch as each comes out of the
ground. It’s no longer the foreground that determines things. Everything comes from the ground.
It’s the background that’s determinant.

                                                                                                   22

Anyway, in the end, then, there are two new spaces: Greek space or 16th century space, [and]
Byzantine space or 17th century space, and then I was saying there’s still one more—let’s say
we’re no longer interested in planes, neither background nor foreground: what’s between the
two? Well, you have to be interested between the two. Who could be sufficiently barbarian to
reject the plane and be interested in the in-between, and what would the in-between planes be?
By what term can one call this thing that is neither ground nor form? What would that be?

For convenience, let’s call it barbarian art. Maybe it’s barbarian art. It has to be barbarian art—it
should be, but who knows. And you see how we then come up with our three positions: primacy
of the foreground; primacy of the background. Between them? The barbarians arrive—they
always arrive “in-between.” What happened? What happened is that somehow the Egyptian way
of achieving unity shifted. The foreground and the background shifted. What’s going on?

I said that it’s either an accident or it’s an event. Accident or event. That’s the formula for
accidents or events. Because once the planes have shifted, once there’s a disjunction between
planes, what do you want form to do? There’s only one thing form can do: fall. It falls between
the two planes. Or if push comes to shove, if it’s animated by some miraculous energy, it will
rise. Now we really get into the history of Western art—one that all comes down to rise and fall.
The figure is constantly falling and rising. Say what? It’s always on the verge of disequilibrium.

In other words, either accident or event—accident: the fall of the figure; event: the rise, the
figure’s ascension -- never stops. Fall and ascension are the two vertical movements
perpendicular to the spreading of planes. They fall and rise again, you know, and what’s the
point? It’s the aesthetic sensibility of, for example, it’s the Christian aesthetic sensibility. The
figure affected by this rising, falling. Deposition of the Cross and the Ascension.26 And I mean at
this level, we’re no longer talking about religious categories; these are aesthetic categories. The
succession, the endless series of the Depositions of the Cross or the Ascensions of Christ. And
it’ll never end. The figure is surrounded. It’s no longer determined as an “essence”; the figure
becomes fundamentally swept up by accidents or events. The painter of “essences” was
Egyptian. Now accidents and events take their place, artistically. Always something just a bit off
balance.

In a great text, The Eye Listens by [Paul] Claudel, specifically on Dutch painting, he analyzes in
detail what he calls this kind of imbalance of bodies. There will be no curtain painted that
doesn’t seem to… just fall back down.27 Or in Rembrandt, the lemons from which some peel
dangles, or these glasses that are on the brink of tipping over, so much so that Cézanne invents—
this isn’t what prompts him to invent, while he’s also looking essentially for the point of
imbalance of form. It couldn’t be otherwise.

And in a few great passages Claudel asks, “What is a composition?” What is it, composition?
The painting becomes the composition! In what way? In the celebrated form of still-life, for
example. And he says—he says it all in one beautiful sentence—he says, “Composition is
organization in the process of coming undone.” He doesn’t say it like that, but almost.28 It’s
organization in the process of coming undone. That is, it’s an organization taken at the point of
imbalance. And Claudel also talks about disintegration by light. Disintegration by light will be
the motif running throughout his commentary on Rembrandt’s The Night Watch.29 We’ll see that.

                                                                                                                     23

So, I’m just stating what we’ve established, that it is solely this that is… you get into all kinds of
adventures once you discern a disjunction between the two planes. I’m not at all saying that
everything gets mixed up, only that all these adventures fall under the heading: the fall or rise of
accidents. These accidents can be all sorts of things. The line might be the collective line of a
temporary group. Flocks of sheep, leaves rustling on trees in the wind, etc. It might be light that
no longer coincides with the form of the object. that might be the eruption of color’s break—in
other words, painting found its essence in what was an accident for an Egyptian context.

Alright, good so far? Well, so what we need to… that’s what we still need to look at; you can see
what’s left for us to cover. We still have two more meetings: all of this and then color. All this
business with space, if I have time, and then color. Anyway, there you go. [End of the recording]
[2:10:00]

Notes

  We should note that in contrast to Deleuze’s detailed consideration of Goethe’s color theory here, he only makes
passing references to Goethe in his brief presentation of color theory in Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation (New
York and London: Continuum, 2003), pp. 132-134, 139-140, and 191 note 14; (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2003), 105-108, 112-113, and 164, note 14.
   Goethe’s Purpur (which Deleuze calls here pourpre) predates the introduction of the word “magenta.” There’s
precedent for retrofitting Goethe’s color wheel to include magenta instead of “pure red.” I’m putting words in both
Goethe’s and Deleuze’s mouths, making them say “magenta” or “red” for Purpur/pourpre and “purple” for violet,
for the sake of clarity.
   Let us note that primitive is rendered as as “primary” when it appears alone; here, however, “primitive” is retained
because it appears alongside primaire. This is to avoid misleading the reader into thinking Deleuze has special plans
for this term or is drawing a meaningful distinction between the two terms.
  Deleuze is working through an illustration. No dotted line in any available sources, but presumably the color wheel
he’s drawn or is looking at has dotted lines running along the different chords (as Deleuze describes them below).
  Cf. §§816-7 of Goethe’s Zur Farbenlehre.
  Ibid., §§826-9.
  In Francis Bacon. Logic of Sensation, Deleuze pays considerable attention to “colorism” and color: see pp. 139143 as well as chapter 16, “Note on Color”.
   While we are unable to locate this exact quote, the closest is a line often featured in books on painting, color and
optics from the early 20th century: “Donnez-moi de la boue, j’en ferai la chair de femme d’une teinte délicieuse”
(Give me some mud and I’ll make of it a woman’s flesh with a delicious hue), in Paul Signac, D’Eugène Delacroix
au néo-impressionisme ([1911], Paris: Hermann, 1978), p. 86. This may actually do a better job of serving Deleuze’s
point. While some painters despaired over gray, muddy colors (Delacroix calls gray the enemy of the painter; see
Signac, p. 37), he boasts that he can bring out beautiful colors from even the muddiest gray.
  “Flatness” is far and away the most common translation for planéité. “Planarity” is much less common and a bit
clunkier in English, although it preserves “plan,” for the sake of readers tracking plan/plane in Deleuze’s career. The
term “flatness” is chosen here because it is Greenberg’s term: “The irreducible essence of pictorial art consists in but
two constitutive conventions or norms: flatness and the delimitation of flatness.” Clement Greenberg, “After
Abstract Expressionism,” Art International 6.8 (October 1962), 30.
   Supports/Surfaces congealed as a group in the French political turmoil of the late ‘60s. It was patched together out
of loosely connected painters from Southern France (André-Pierre Arnal, Vincent Bioules, Noël Dolla, Toni Grand,
Bernard Pages, Patrick Saytour, Viallat,) and from Paris (Louis Cane, Marc Devade, Jean-Pierre Pincemin, Valensi
and Daniel Dezeuze) who all shared a common interest in rejecting the status quo of the second School of Paris.
Beyond their geographical differences, they all agreed on the fact that practice (painting) should go hand in hand
with theory (writing, or critical thinking), but the southerners foregrounded practice where the Parisians emphasized
theory and political activism. Even before the group’s name was coined, their work had developed into a critique of
Paris’s centralized art system and comfortable esthetics. It is worth noting that before they briefly made it on the

                                                                                                                        24

Parisian art scene as a group, most of the artists were “provinciaux”-- mainly from the southeastern cities of
Montpellier and Nice -- a term used more or less derogatorily in French to designate someone who is not up to speed
with the latest trends. This conflictual dynamic between Parisians and Provincials was very much at the forefront of
the members’ relationships, and when the group eventually fell apart in 1972, it did so along that particular fault
line. [A footnote by David Lapoujade in Sur la peinture for consideration: “Deleuze says ‘in reverse’ (à l’envers) or
backwards, but the context suggests that probably meany ‘on’ the reverse side (sur l’envers), as suggested by his
subsequent mention of the Supports / Surfaces movement” (p. 243).]
   For consistency: “flattening” of space, if planéité is “flatness.” “Planification” is an option, but its only
justification would be that it highlights the plan common to planéité and planification. The same effect is attempted
by italicizing the word “planning,” and “planning” is the strongest choice by cluing the reader into the relationship
between plan terms, and it also communicates something happening in the French: the simultaneous use of different
meanings of plan—as both “plane” and “plan.”
   Word missing in transcript.
   https://www.musee-orsay.fr/en/artworks/la-belle-angele-286.
    Here “field” is used for aplat, for lack of a better term. As above, an ideal translation would communicate the
“flat” in à plat/aplat, in association with planéité and planification. “Flat area of color,” “flattened color,” and other
similar phrases are sometimes used for aplat, but these weigh Deleuze’s analysis down in other parts of the seminar.
   Deleuze cites Merleau-Ponty in Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, p. 178 note 1, from Phenomenology of
Perception (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1967), pp. 207-42.
   While there are several references to flesh and skin in Goethe’s text, a precise match for Deleuze’s quote is not
present. However, Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, the discussion of Gaugin’s “La Belle Angèle” and Van
Gogh’s postman paintings precedes consideration of flesh in different artists’ work, notably Bacon, pp. 140-143.
   The French term is often preserved in English. “Partitioning” might also work.
   This might be an error. The reference earlier was to “flatness [planéité] and the determination of flatness,” but
here he says “linearity.” The context here increases the doubt: if we’re talking about how, for the Egyptians, form
and ground occupy the same plane, that seems to be a question of “flatness” rather than “linearity.”
   The translator notes that as he was unable to pin down the appropriate context for this discussion, much of the
translation here is uninformed.
   On haptic and the following distinctions, see Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, pp. 154-156 and 195 note 2.
The reference is to the second edition of Riegl’s Late Roman Art History, trans. Rolf Winkes (1901; 2nd ed., Rome:
Giorgio Bretschneider Editore, 1985).
   Deleuze ends Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation with these words: “But the fact itself, this pictorial fact that
has come from the hand, is the formation of a third eye, a haptic eye, a haptic vision of the eye, this new clarity. It is
as if the duality of the tactile and the optical were surpassed visually in this haptic function born of the diagram” (p.
161).
   Deleuze cites Gauguin (without specific reference) in Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, p. 55, as “The eye,
insatiable and in heat”.
   Henri Maldiney, Regard Parole Espace (Lausanne: Éditions l’Age d’homme, 1973).
   Let us note the effort here to avoid translating ton as “tone.” In most contexts in English, tone specifically refers to
a shade of color—you obtain different tones by adding black to a color (as opposed to adding white in order to
obtain different tints). So far, this sentence makes the best case against using “tone.” Doing so would render these
two different scales/ranges synonymous: a range of different “tones” would be none other than a range of different
“values” in color. In nearly all cases, “color” or “hue” is a better equivalent for Deleuze’s ton.
   “The boundaries of bodies are the least of all things […] Wherefore O painter! do not surround your bodies with
lines, and above all when representing objects smaller than nature...” From The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, ed.
Jean Paul Richter, vol 1 of 2 (New York: Dover, 2012), 49. Manuscript pagination. Emphasis added.
   These terms are treated in a more general way, but one could alternatively understand them as references to titles
of paintings.
   See The Eye Listens, trans. Elsie Pell (Port Washington, NY: Philosophical Library, 1950), 42, a reference to a
curtain “raised for an instant[,] ready to fall again” that makes its way into the book on Francis Bacon.
   Deleuze may not be quoting Claudel verbatim, but here he comes closer. In L’oeil écoute, Claudel calls Dutch
still-life un arrangement en train de se défaire. For reference, see the 1950 translation by Elsie Pell: “Dutch still-life
is an arrangement in imminent danger of disintegration”, p. 48.
   See Francis Bacon. The Logic of Sensation, p. 182 note 5.