1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Spinoza: The Velocities of Thought

Lecture 13, 17 March 1981

Transcriptions: Part 1, Yaëlle Tannau (duration 31 :13); Part 2 Cecile Lathuillère
(duration = 46:50); Part 3, Suzanne Larrieu & Véronique Boudon (duration 46:55); Part 4
Guy Nicolas (duration 30:52); Augmented Transcription, Charles J. Stivale

Translated by Charles J. Stivale

Part 1

Won’t you close the door? [Pause] Won’t you close the windows, well, if you can't hear
anything? [Pause; various noises] There we are... There we are, there we are... This ought to be
our last session on Spinoza, unless you have questions. In any case, today whatever might cause
you concern, if anything concerns you, you’ll have to let me know, and you must intervene as
much as possible.

And so, today I would like us to do two things: that we finish, not with the Spinozist conception
of individuality, because there, it seems to me that we have stayed enough a long time on this
conception, but that we draw conclusions from it concerning a point, a formulation, a rather
famous formulation by Spinoza, which is the following: "We experience, we feel and we
experience" -- he does not say: we think ; these are some very loaded words: feeling and
experiencing -- "that we are eternal." What is this famous Spinozist eternity? Good.

And then finally, it is absolutely necessary for us to draw conclusions about what should have
been the implicit theme of all these sessions, namely, well, what relationship ultimately [is there]
between an ontology and an ethics, once it’s said that this relationship interests philosophy for
itself? But the fact is that this relationship was only founded and developed by Spinoza, to the
point that someone who would come and tell us: "Well, my project would be to create a kind of
ethics that would exist as the correlate of an ontology, that is, of a theory of being", well, we
could stop him and say, "very good, we can say some very, very new things along this path, but
this path is Spinozist; it’s a path signed ‘Spinoza’."

Good. You remember -- and I’m reminding you of this not at all to review these points, but to
judge them as what we’ve acquired -- you remember the three dimensions of individuality. First
dimension: I have an infinity of extensive parts -- moreover, if you remember more precisely -- I
have an infinity of infinite sets of extensive parts external to each other. I’m composed to
infinity. Second dimension: these infinite sets of extensive parts external to each other belong to
me, but they belong to me according to characteristic relations, relations of movement and rest,
about which I tried to state what their nature was the last time we met. Third dimension: these

                                                                                                        2

characteristic relations only express a degree of power (puissance) which constitutes my essence,
my very own essence, that is, a singular essence.
So, the three dimensions are the extensive parts external to each other that belong to me, the
relations according to which these parts belong to me, and the essence as degree, gradus or
modus, the singular essence which is expressed in these relations. And Spinoza never says it,
because he doesn't have to say it. But we, his readers, are forced to notice a curious harmony
between what and what? Between these three dimensions of individuality and what he calls, on a
completely different occasion, the three kinds of knowledge. [Pause]

You remember the three kinds of knowledge, in fact, and you will see the strict parallelism
between the three dimensions of individuality as such and the three kinds of knowledge. But that
there is such a parallelism between the two must already leads us to certain conclusions. I mean,
it's not a thing that he needs to say -- I insist on this because I would also like you to create some
rules for reading any philosopher -- he's not going to say "look at this"; it’s not up to him to
explain. Once again, I insist on this greatly; you can't do two things at the same time. You cannot
both say something and explain what you are saying. That’s why things are so difficult. It’s not
up to Spinoza to explain what Spinoza said; Spinoza has better things to do, he has things to say.
So, explaining what Spinoza says is not bad, but still it does not go far, it cannot go very far.
That’s why the history of philosophy has to be extremely modest. So, he's not going to tell us,
“look at this”, eh? “you can see that my three kinds of knowledge and then my three dimensions
of the individual correspond with each other”. It’s not for him to say. But for us, in our modest
task, it’s up to us to say this.

And in fact, in what sense do they correspond? You remember that the first kind of knowledge is
the set of inadequate ideas, that is, passive affections and passion affects that result from
inadequate ideas. It’s the set of signs, confused, inadequate ideas, and passions, affects that result
from these affections. You have to remember all of that because this is what we’ve acquired in
the last few meetings.1 And under what conditions, what causes us, from the moment we exist,
not only to be doomed to inadequate ideas and passions, but to be condemned and even, at first
view, doomed to have only inadequate ideas and passive affects or passions? What creates our
sad situation? [Pause] Understand that this is obvious; I don't want to go into too much detail
here; I just want you to feel this, to sense this.
It is primarily insofar as we have extensive parts, insofar as we have extensive parts, [that] we
are condemned to inadequate ideas. Why? Because what is the regime of extensive parts? Once
again, they are external to each other. They pass through infinities, both at the same time. The
simplest bodies, which are the ultimate parts, you remember, the simplest bodies, they have no
interiority. They are always determined from the outside. What does that mean? Through shock,
through shock from another part. In what forms do they encounter each other through shock? In
the simplest form, namely that they constantly keep changing their relations since it is always in
terms of a relation that the parts belong to me or don’t belong to me. Parts of my body leave my
body, there take another relation, the relation of arsenic, the relation of anything, the relation of
the mosquito when it bites us, the relation... I do not stop integrating parts under my relations.

                                                                                                    3

When I eat, for example, well, when I eat, there are extensive parts that I appropriate within
myself.
What does that mean, appropriating parts within oneself? Appropriating parts within oneself
means making them leave the previous relation they were realizing in order to take on a new
relation, this new relation being one of my own relations, namely with meat, I make flesh within
me. How awful! [Laughter] In the end, one has to live; it doesn't stop being like that, shocks and
appropriations of parts, transformations of relations, compositions to infinity, etc. Good. And this
regime of parts external to each other which never cease reacting, at the same time as the infinite
sets into which they enter do not cease to vary. It is precisely this regime of the inadequate idea,
of confused perceptions, and passive affects, and affect-passions that result from them.
In other words, it’s because I am composed of an aggregate, an infinity of infinite sets of
extensive parts, external to each other, that I do not cease having perceptions of external things,
perceptions of myself, perceptions of myself in my relations with external things, perceptions of
external things in relation to myself, and all of this is what constitutes the world of signs. When I
say: ah this is good, ah that is bad, what are these signs of good and bad? These inadequate signs
simply mean: ah well yes, I am encountering parts on the outside that agree with my own parts in
their relations; [if] bad, I’m encountering, I’m encountering parts, on the outside as well, that do
not suit me, in the relation through which they occur. So, you see that this whole domain of
infinite sets of parts external to each other corresponds exactly to the first kind of knowledge. It
is because I am composed of an infinity of extrinsic parts that I have inadequate perceptions. As
a result, the first kind of knowledge corresponds to this first dimension of individuality. [Pause]
And we have seen precisely that the problem of kinds of knowledge was very well initiated by
the Spinozist question, namely: well, in a sense, we might believe that we are condemned to the
inadequate, to the first kind. Henceforth, how do we explain the possibility that we have to get
out of this confused world, this inadequate world, this first kind of knowledge? In Spinoza's
answer, it is that yes, there is a second kind of knowledge. But how does he define it, the second
kind of knowledge? In the Ethics, it’s very striking. Knowledge of the second kind is knowledge
of relations, of their composition and their decomposition. One cannot say any better that the
second kind of knowledge corresponds to the second dimension of individuality, since, in fact,
extrinsic parts are not only extrinsic, each in relation to the others, but they are radically
extrinsic, absolutely extrinsic.
So, what does it mean that extrinsic parts belong to me? We've seen it a thousand times. That
only means one thing for Spinoza, namely that these parts are always determined from the
outside to enter under one relation or another, according to one relation or another which
characterizes me. And once again, what does it mean to die? To die only means one thing, that
the parts which belonged to me according to one relation or another are determined from the
outside to enter in another relation which does not characterize me, but which characterizes
something else.
The first kind of knowledge is therefore the knowledge of the effects of encounters or the effects
of actions and interactions, of the extrinsic parts on each other. Yes, we cannot define it better;

                                                                                                       4

this is very clear here, very clear, eh? The effects defined by…, the effects caused through the
shock or the encounter of the external parts upon each other define the entire first kind of
knowledge. In fact, my natural perception is an effect of the shocks and collisions between
external parts which compose me and external parts which compose other bodies.
But the second kind of knowledge is a completely different mode of knowledge. It is the
knowledge of the relations that compose me and the relations that compose other things. You
see, it is no longer the effects of encounters between parts, it’s the knowledge of relations,
namely the way in which my characteristic relations are composed with others and in which
[Pause] my characteristic relations and other relations are decomposed. And here, this is
adequate knowledge. And in fact, this knowledge can only be adequate, whereas the knowledge,
which was satisfied with collecting why, since it’s a knowledge which rises toward
understanding causes… In fact, any relation whatsoever is a reason, any relation whatsoever is
the reason through which an infinity of extensive parts belongs to one body rather than another.

Therefore, the second kind of knowledge – I’m simply emphasizing this -- is that it’s not an
abstract knowledge at all, as I have tried to say. If you create an abstract knowledge out of it, all
of Spinoza collapses. So obviously, the mistake of commentaries is always seeking, always
telling oneself, oh well yes, this is mathematics. But no, it's not math. It has nothing to do with
math. Mathematics is simply a special case. Mathematics can indeed be defined as a theory of
relations. So here, yes, math is a section of the second kind of knowledge. It is a theory of
relations and proportions. See Euclid. Well, it's a theory of relations and proportions at that point,
mathematics is part of the second kind. But to think that the second kind is a type of
mathematical knowledge is an abominable stupidity because, at that point, all of Spinoza
becomes abstract. We don't base our lives on mathematics, [we] must not exaggerate, whereas
here, it’s indeed a question of life problems.

That's why I remind you, I chose as an example -- because it seems infinitely more Spinozist to
me than geometry or mathematics or even the Euclidean theory of proportions -- I chose as an
example: well yes, what the adequate knowledge of the second kind means is at the level of
learning to swim, "ah I know how to swim". No one can deny that knowing how to swim is a
conquest of existence. This is fundamental; you understand, I conquer an element. An element,
this doesn’t go without saying, to conquer an element. I learn to swim, I learn to fly, all that is
great. Okay, what does that mean? What does it mean? Well, it's very simple. Not knowing how
to swim, what is that? It really means being at the mercy of encountering a wave. So you have
the infinite set of water molecules that compose the wave, it composes a wave, and I am saying,
it's a wave because these simplest bodies that I call molecules -- in fact, they’re not the simplest
– we would have to go even farther than water molecules. Water molecules already belong to a
body, the aquatic body, the body of the ocean, the body etc., or the body of the pond, of a
particular pond. [Deleuze spells it out: é-t-a-n-g] [Laughter]2

Well then, what is knowledge of the first kind? Well, come on, I'm going, I’m starting, I'm
within the first kind of knowledge. I’m starting, I’m dabbling (je barbote), as they say. What
does it mean to dabble? Dabbling is very simple; the word dabble indeed indicates, as we indeed
see, that it’s extrinsic relations. Sometimes the wave buffets me, and sometimes it sweeps me

                                                                                                      5

away. These are shock effects. These are shock effects, notably, I do not know anything about
relations that are composed or decomposed. I receive the effects of extrinsic parts. The parts that
belong to me are shaken, receive a shock effect from the parts that belong to the wave. And then
sometimes I laugh and sometimes I whine, depending on whether the wave makes me laugh or
clobbers me. [Laughter] I'm within the passion affects. "Ah mama, the wave clobbered me".
Fine. "Ah mom, the wave clobbered me", a cry that we continuously repeat as long as we are in
the first kind of knowledge, since we will not stop saying: "Ah, the table hurt me," and that is
exactly the same as saying the other hurt me. [It’s] not at all because the table is inanimate.
Spinoza is so much smarter than anything they might have said afterwards. It’s not because the
table is inanimate that one shouldn’t say that "it hurt me". It is as silly to say "Peter (Pierre) hurt
me" as it is to say "a stone (une pierre) hurt me", or the wave hurt me. It's the same level, it's the
first kind here. Fine. You follow me?
So, on the contrary, I learn to swim doesn't necessarily mean that I have a mathematical or
physical, scientific knowledge of the movement of the wave. It means that I have a skill, an
astonishing skill (savoir-faire), that is, I have a kind of sense of rhythm, a rhythmicity. What
does rhythm mean? What does that mean, all of this? That means that I learn how to compose
my characteristic relations directly with the relations of the wave. This doesn't occur any longer
between the wave and me, that is, it doesn't happen between the extensive parts, the wet parts of
the wave and the parts of my body. It occurs between relations, the relations that compose the
wave, fine, the relations that compose my body and my ability, when I can swim, to present my
body in relations that are made up directly with the relations of the wave. So, this means I dive at
the right moment, I emerge at the right moment, I avoid the approaching wave or, on the
contrary, I use it, etc., all of this art of composing relations.
And I was saying, it's the same thing, I'm looking for specific examples that are not
mathematical, since, again, mathematics is just one area of that. We must say mathematics is the
formal theory of the second kind of knowledge and not the second kind of knowledge. I am
saying, it’s the same with love. Yes, waves or love, it's the same. In a love of the first kind, well,
you are perpetually in this regime of encounters between extrinsic parts. In what is called a
"great love", "Camille" [La Dame aux camélias] -- how beautiful it is! [Laughter] -- well, there
you have a composition of relations. Well, my example is serious because "Camille" is the first
kind of knowledge, [Laughter]3 but in the second kind of knowledge, there you have a kind of
composition of relations with each other. You are no longer in a regime of inadequate ideas,
namely the effect of parts on my own, the effect of an external part or the effect of an external
body on my own. There you reach a much deeper domain which is the composition of the
characteristic relations of one body with the characteristic relations of another body, and that
kind of flexibility or rhythm that results in your ability to present your body, and henceforth your
soul as well, to present your soul or your body according to the relation that is most directly
composed with the other’s relation. You indeed sense that it’s a strange happiness. Well there
you have the second kind of knowledge.

And the third kind of knowledge, and why is there a third kind of knowledge? There is a third
kind of knowledge because relations, well, these are not essences, Spinoza tells us. The third

                                                                                                      6

kind of knowledge or intuitive knowledge, what is it? It goes beyond relations and their
composition and decomposition. [Pause] This is the knowledge of essences. It goes further than
relations, since it reaches the essence that is expressed in relations, the essence on which
relations depend. In fact, if relations are my own, if relations characterize me, it’s because they
express my essence. What is my essence? It’s a degree of power of action (puissance). Well,
knowledge of the third kind is the knowledge that this degree of power of action takes from itself
and takes from other degrees of power of action. This time, it is a knowledge of singular
essences. [Pause] The second and, with all the more reason, the third kind of knowledge, are
perfectly adequate.

So, you indeed see that there is a correspondence between kinds of knowledge and dimensions of
individuality, which means what, ultimately, this coincidence? This means that the kinds of
knowledge are more than kinds of knowledge; they are modes of existence. These are manners of
living. But why are these manners of living? This becomes difficult because finally, every
individual is made up of the three dimensions at the same time. This is where we will find
something of a final problem.

You, me, anyone, any individual has all three dimensions at once. So, what can we do to get by?
Every individual has all three dimensions at once, okay. This is exactly the problem: each
individual has all three dimensions at the same time, and yet there are individuals who will never
get out of the first kind of knowledge. They will not be able to rise to the second or third. They
will never succeed in forming what Spinoza calls a "common notion", a common notion being
precisely, I remind you, "the idea of a relation", the idea of a characteristic relation. With all the
more reason, they will never have a knowledge of their singular essence, nor of other singular
essences. How do you explain that? It’s not at all automatic; each individual has the three
dimensions. But careful, one doesn't have the three kinds of knowledge by that very fact; one
may very well stay within the first. How do we explain this last point? [Pause]
Let's approach the question differently. When are there oppositions? For example, you can hate
yourself; sometimes we hate each other. Hate [is] this kind of opposition of an existing mode
from one individual to another individual; what is it? How do we explain hatred? Here we have a
first text from Spinoza, book IV of the Ethics, the axiom which is at the beginning of book IV.
[Deleuze consults his copy] This axiom is going to annoy us greatly, apparently, and Spinoza
does not explain much about it.
Axiom: "There is no individual thing" -- that is, no individual -- "There is no individual thing in
nature, than there is not another more powerful and strong.” Up to that point, it's okay. There is
no final power because the final power is all of nature. So, there is no final power in nature. A
thing being given, it is defined by a degree of power (puissance). Well, there is always a higher
degree of power. As powerful as I may be, there is always a degree of power... In fact, we have
seen that there was an infinity of degrees of power. The infinite existing always in action, for
Spinoza, is always given actually, is always given in action, a greater degree of power than the
greatest degree of power that I can conceive. So, up to that point, this axiom would not be
annoying.

                                                                                                      7

But he adds: "There is no individual thing in nature, than there is not another more powerful and
strong, but, whatsoever thing be given, there is something stronger whereby it can be destroyed."
There this text ought to annoy us. Why? Because the second sentence provides unexpected
precision. The first sentence tells us: A thing being given, it is defined by its power. But a degree
of power being given, that is, something in its essence, the degree of power is the essence of a
thing. Well, there is always a more powerful one. Okay, that's fine. We understand.

He adds a second sentence, careful: By the more powerful thing, the first thing can always be
destroyed. This is really annoying. Why? Suddenly, we tell ourselves: Ah well, I didn't
understand anything; what's going to happen? He seems to be telling us that an essence can be
destroyed by the more powerful essence. So, at that point, there is no longer any third kind of
knowledge. There is no longer even a second kind of knowledge because what is destruction?
It’s obviously the effect of one essence on another. If an essence can be destroyed by the more
powerful essence, by the higher degree essence, this is a catastrophe, all Spinozism collapses.
We are brought back to the effects; we are brought back to the first kind [of knowledge]. There
can no longer be any knowledge of the essences. How would there be an adequate knowledge of
the essences, if the essences are in relations such that one is destroying the other? [Interruption
of the recording] [31:13]

Part 2

[A bit later, in book V],4 there is a proposition thirty-seven, and the proposition thirty-seven
includes, after its statement and after the demonstration of the proposition, includes an sidebar
proposition under the title of "Scolia", and the Scolia tells us this: the axiom from the fourth part
-- see? this is what I have just read -- the axiom from the fourth part concerns individual things
insofar as we consider them in relation to a certain time and a certain place, which, I believe, no
one doubts. Here, we have to laugh because nonetheless, if I insist on this “what nobody doubts”,
he waited so many pages, whereas he could have told us at the level [of book] IV; it would have
helped us, and we would have been less annoyed. That’s his business. Why does he only say it
long after? He says it when he needs to say it.

What does this detail mean? He tells us: careful, the axiom of destruction, the axiom of
opposition, one essence can oppose another to the point of destroying it, that is comprehensible
only when we consider things in relation to a certain time and place. He doesn't tell us more.
What does it mean to consider things in relation to a certain time and a certain place? That means
considering them in their existence. What does it mean to consider them in their existence,
considering them as they exist, as they have passed into existence, as they pass into existence?
What does it mean? We’ve seen this.

What is it to pass into existence? It means this: we pass to existence, an essence passes into
existence, when an infinity of extensive parts is determined, finds itself determined from outside
to belong to it in a particular relation. I have an essence, me, me Pierre or Paul, I have an
essence. I say that I pass into existence when an infinity of extensive parts is determined from
outside, that is, through the shocks, which refers to other extensive parts, is determined from
outside to enter into a relation that characterizes me. So before, I did not exist to the extent that I

                                                                                                        8

did not have these extensive parts. That’s what to be born is. I am born when an infinity of
extensive parts is determined from the outside through the encounter with other parts to enter
into a relation which is mine, that is, which characterizes me. See? At that point, at that point, I
have a relation to a certain time and a certain place. What is this time and this place? The time of
my birth and the place of my birth. It happened here. It's here.

Here and now, what is it? But this is the regime of extensive parts, the extensive parts. The sets
of extensive parts always have a time and a place. Moreover, it will last what it will last. The
extensive parts are determined from the outside to enter into a particular relation which
characterizes us. But for how long? Until, until they are determined to enter into another
relationship. At that point, they pass into another body. They no longer belong to me. It lasts a
certain length of time. [Pause] Good. What does that mean then? How should this enlighten us?
In fact, I can only speak of opposition between two individuals to the extent that these
individuals are considered to exist, here and now. [That’s] very important for the formation of
relations of opposition. It is solely to the extent that individuals are considered to exist here and
now that they can enter. This is not a question of kindness or wickedness. This is a question of
logical possibility.

I can only have relations of opposition with another individual based on what? As a function of
the extensive parts which compose us, which belong to us. That’s the place, the milieu of the
opposition. That's it. It’s the extensive parts. And indeed, this is required; in the oppositions
between individuals, what’s this about? In the oppositions between individuals, it’s always a
question of knowing into what relation ultimately such infinite sets of extensive parts will enter.
Imagine this sad situation: I am fighting with a dog to eat, to eat a kind of mash. [Laughter]
Okay. [It’s a] horrible sight. How to recount this, this spectacle? Well, well, [Pause] what is it?
You have three terms: food, the dog and me. So, I bite the dog to grab his food. [Laughter] The
dog, he swipes me with his paw.

Okay, what's going on? What is that? You have an infinite set of extensive parts in the meat
relation. You have an infinite set of extensive parts in the dog relation. You have an infinite set
of extensive parts in relation to me. And all of that swirls around, and all of that collides.
Namely, me, I want to conquer the extensive parts of the meat to assimilate them to myself, that
is, to impose my relation on them, to act so that they no longer realize the meat relation and so
that they come to realize one of my own relations. The dog wants the same thing. I bite the dog,
that is, I want to make him run off, etc., etc. ... Him, he bites me. Finally, we get stuck in this.
This is the domain of oppositions. Opposition is effort. This is the respective effort of each
existent [being] to appropriate the extensive parts. What does it mean to appropriate extensive
parts, that is, to act so that they realize the relation that corresponds to a particular individual?
Fine. [Pause]

In a way, I can always say: I am destroyed by what’s stronger than I am. And indeed, as long as I
exist, this is the risk of existence. [Pause] Fine. And this risk of existence is as one with what is
called death since, once again, what is death? It is the fact that Spinoza will call necessary in the
sense of inevitability, that the extensive parts, which belonged to me within one of my
characteristic relations, cease to belong to me and pass under another relation which
characterizes other bodies. This is inevitable by the very law of existence. An essence will

                                                                                                        9

always encounter a stronger essence than its own within conditions of existence which means
that, henceforth, the stronger essence destroys, destroys what? Literally, [it] destroys the
belonging of the extensive parts to the first essence. [Pause] Okay, fine.

But I am saying, first -- even if it means correcting this later, and I am saying that it will indeed
have to be corrected -- I am saying: suppose now that I am dead. I am dead. Okay, I'm dead. For
Spinoza, this will take on an abstract air, but it’s linked. It’s up to you to make an effort. I'm
going to try to say later why it doesn't seem abstract to me but make an effort. I am dead. Fine.
What does it mean? Once again, if you accept these premises which are not at all, it seems to me,
abstract theory, which are really a manner of living, if this is indeed death, it means that there are
no more extensive parts. There is no longer any extrinsic set that belongs to me. I am
dispossessed. Fine, I'm dispossessed. I have no more parts. That means: my characteristic
relations stop being realized. It means all that, but not just that.

So, what doesn’t death prevent? What, according to Spinoza, what that does not prevent is that:
my relations stop being realized, fine, but there is an eternal truth in these relations. They are not
realized, but we have seen that, for Spinoza, the relations were largely independent of their
terms. Realizing a relation means: terms occur that realize the relation. A relation is realized
through its terms. Here [in death], there are no more terms which realize it. But the relation is not
reduced to the terms which realize it. So, the relation has an eternal truth insofar as being a
relation, a truth independent of its terms. It is no longer realized, but it remains actual insofar as
being a relation. It’s not that it passes into the state of virtuality. There is an actuality of the
unrealized relation.

And with all the more reason, there is an actuality of the essence which is expressed in the
relation since the essence is not at all an extensive part. It’s an intensive part. It’s a degree of
power (puissance). Well, this degree of power no longer corresponds to it at all -- this degree,
fine, we saw it the last time -- this degree of intensity no longer corresponds to it in extension.
There are no more extensive parts that correspond to the intensive part. Okay, good. But, the
reality of the intensive part, insofar as being intensive, it remains. In other words, there is a
double eternity, entirely correlative. There is a double eternity, the eternity of the relation or of
relations which characterize it, and the eternity of the essence, of the individual essence which
constitutes us, which, for its part, cannot be affected by death.

And moreover, at this level, as he says in Book V, from the text that I have just read, at this level,
there can be no opposition. Why? Because all relations are composed to infinity according to the
laws of relations. There are always relations that are composed, and, on the other hand, all the
essences agree with all the essences. Each essence agrees with all the others insofar as being a
pure degree of intensity. In other words, for Spinoza, to say that a degree of power, or a degree
of intensity, destroys another degree of intensity, is a meaningless proposition. The phenomena
of destruction can only exist on the level they have for status (pour statut). And they refer to the
regimes of the extensive parts which belong provisionally to me. [Pause]

Henceforth, what does that mean? I feel, I experience that I am eternal. It's not, "I know it." What
I would like to have you sense is the difference between the two propositions. "I know, I know,
and I maintain that I am immortal". This is, if you will, the proposition; you could say it’s a

                                                                                                   10

proposition, I don't know, a theological proposition. "I know and I maintain that I am immortal".
And, I feel and experience that I am eternal. And in fact, in Book V, Spinoza attacks any
conception of immortality. He tells us: no, no. This is not a question of saying that everyone is
immortal; it’s about saying that everyone is eternal. And this is not at all the same. Why is it not
at all the same? How is this presented by Spinoza? What is this experimentation? It’s more than -
- I think you have to take the word in the strongest sense -- it’s not just: I experience, I have
experience. Rather, it is: to experience in an active manner. I experience that I am eternal. What
is this experiment?

Very curious, if you look in literature, it comes much later; it’s in 19th century English literature
that you will find a kind of Spinozism of this type, eternity, a kind of experimentation with
eternity, and strangely, also linked to the idea of intensity, as if I could only experience eternity
in an intensive form. And this is a frequent theme among authors who precisely do not seem to
me so far from Spinoza, even if they do not know it, authors like [D.H.] Lawrence, to a lesser
extent like [John Cowper] Powys, a kind of experience of eternity in the form of the intense.
There we are.5

I'm trying to make this more concrete. As long as you exist, you exist, you oppose others. We all
oppose each other. And Spinoza doesn't at all say that we should get out of this. He knows that
this is absolutely necessary. It’s a dimension. It's a dimension of existence, okay. But, he says,
there you go, let's take two extreme cases. Take individual A, individual Pierre. Let's take Pierre,
who spends most of it -- you will see how there, Spinoza becomes very nuanced and very
concrete -- we can say of Pierre that he spent his life, roughly speaking, in the first kind of
knowledge. Yes, this is even the case for most people, since according to Spinoza, a bit of
philosophy is still necessary to get out of the first kind of knowledge. You have to ... Yes, fine.
Take the case of someone who lives in the first kind of knowledge, the largest part. Why do I
specify the largest part? In fact, you have to be very optimistic; this doesn't happen all the time.

This someone, anyway, will have understood a little something in his life, once, not for long.
One day, one evening, one evening when he gets home, he will have understood a little
something. He felt like he understood a little something. Maybe he will have really understood
something, and then all his life, he will spend it trying to forget what he had understood because
it was so striking. All of a sudden, he thought, "But what? What ... There’s something wrong.”
Everyone, everyone, even the last of the wretches has had this experience. Even the last fool has
brushed up against something that... where he said to himself, "But, wouldn't I be ... Wouldn't I
have spent my whole life deceiving myself?” So, we always emerge a bit from the first kind of
knowledge. That is, in Spinozist terms, he will have understood, even on a tiny point, he will
have had an intuition of, either of something essential, or else he will have had a kind of, either
the intuition of something essential, yes, or an understanding of a relation.

There are even -- so here, we can be very generous -- there are very few people who are totally
stupid. There’s always something they understand. I mean, we're all, we all have our little thing,
for example, a sense... some have an amazing sense of a particular animal. It doesn't stop them
from being mean, all that. But there they have, they have something. Ah, yes, there. Or else, the
sense of wood. Ah, yes, that. This guy, this imbecile, this imbecile is so mean, [but] at least when
he talks about trees, there is something, one feels that there is something. And then we spend our

                                                                                                    11

time having these experiences. Ah, there, yes. The feeling that, if you will, it's over, that even the
worst clown... There’s a point at which, no, it's over being a clown. Finally, there is something.
Okay, that's how it is.

You can tell yourself, well yes, nobody is condemned to the first kind of knowledge. There is
always, always a little hope. Fine. Oh, that’s very important. And, because once again, how we
save ourselves is solely, and very strangely, in being unable even to talk about duration anymore,
in being forced actually to talk about instants. There are always instants in which there is a
glimmer in someone. Ah, he was less obnoxious than I thought. It was enough to locate this
something. So, of course, sometimes we are so... We no longer want to discover. So, fine. And
then, it quickly changes back. It quickly changes back. But I don't know, the worst police officer,
the worst... I don't know, there is surely a little something about him, surely.

So, Spinoza is not at all calling for the Salvation Army, "you have to save everyone", no.
[Laughter] He wants to tell us something else. He wants to tell us: there we are, there we are, you
understand, it's very complicated because ultimately, your existence is a matter of proportions.
What does this mean “a matter of proportions”? Well, okay: You have extensive parts that
compose you. And, as long as you exist, there is no question of giving this up. That’s completely
stupid: what would it be to give up the extensive parts that compose you, that is, to give up all
the combinations of existence, just like that, to withdraw from lived oppositions? I’m
withdrawing from lived oppositions. Ah, good, well, I’m only eating grass, I’m living in a cave,
etc. This is basically what’s always been called asceticism.

That doesn't interest Spinoza at all. It even seems to him a very, very shady solution, very, very
suspicious. He goes so far as to think that the ascetic is deeply wicked, and that the ascetic
pursues an inexpiable hatred, an inexpiable hatred against the world, against nature, etc. So,
that’s not what Spinoza wants to tell us at all. He’s telling us: be careful. In your existence, well,
it's a matter of certain relative proportions, between what and what?

You’ll grant me a... So, now, I have my three dimensions of the individual: my extensive parts;
second, relations; third, the essence or the intensive part that constitutes us. I can express them in
the following form:

The extensive parts that belong to me are just like the inadequate ideas that I have, they are
necessarily inadequate. So, these are the inadequate ideas that I have, and the passions that arise
from these inadequate ideas. The relations that characterize me when I reach their knowledge are
common notions or adequate ideas. Essence as pure intensive part, as pure degree of power
which constitutes us, it is still one and several adequate ideas. Spinoza tells us: in your existence,
you yourself can have a vague idea of the proportion that there is between the inadequate ideas
and passions, since the two are linked, the inadequate ideas and passion affects which fill your
existence, on the one hand, and on the other hand, the adequate ideas and active affects to which
you are striving.

I will remind you of the inadequate ideas. I'm going to finish quickly to see if... to ask you if you
understood. Inadequate ideas and passions refer to the dimension of existence, to the first
dimension: having extensive parts. The other two aspects, knowledge of relations and knowledge

                                                                                                      12

of degrees of power, as intensive part, refer to the two other aspects: characteristic relations and
essence as intensive part. Suppose that in my existence, I have relatively... It’s not a question of
renouncing the extensive parts; it would be killing oneself, and we have seen what Spinoza
thought of suicide. Imagine that during my existence, I have relatively achieved -- and Spinoza
says: the more it would be impossible since you have extensive parts and you are subject to the
law of extensive parts -- no, but suppose you have attained, relatively frequently, adequate ideas
and active affects. This is a case, a first case.

And the second case, imagine the other case. You have achieved it, very, very rarely, and not
durably. Fine. Now, put yourself into the moment of your death. [This is] very concrete, all that.
When you die, in the first case and in the second case, what happens? In the second case, when
you die, that means, in any case, your extensive parts disappear, that is, they enter into other
bodies, that is, they realize other relations than yours. And so, when you die, and when, in the
second case, you have held in the majority of your existence inadequate ideas and passive
affects, that means that what dies is relatively the largest part of yourself. It’s proportionally the
greatest part of yourself.

On the other hand, in the other case, it is curious, it is there that a kind of relative proportion
comes in. I mean, that's what's important in book V. If you miss it in book V, at the same time he
says it explicitly, I think you can't understand the movement of the book V. In the other case:
suppose that, in your existence, you have, on the contrary, proportionately reached a relatively
large number of adequate ideas and active affects. At that point, what dies from you is a
relatively small, insignificant part.

So, it’s very curious. It seems to me that there, the idea of existence as a test (épreuve) is
reintroduced in Spinoza. But it’s not a moral test at all. It’s like a kind of physicochemical test. I
experience that I am eternal. Yes. What does this text mean? What does it mean? I'm
experiencing it from now onward, on what condition? That’s not at all the question “does the
soul survive the body?”, not at all the question. The question of immortality is: in what sense and
in what form does the soul survive the body? As it has been posited by theology and philosophy,
from -- if you will, there, it seems to me that whatever their differences which are great -- from
Plato to Descartes.

From Plato to Descartes, what is posed is really the question of the immortality of the soul. And
the immortality of the soul, at that point, it necessarily goes through the problem of a before and
an after. Why? What determines the before and the after from the point of view of the
immortality of the soul, namely, the moment of the union of the soul and the body, specifically,
the before of the soul is before the incarnation, before the soul unites with a body? The after, the
after of immortality is after... the soul, after death, that is, after [it has been joined to the body].

Hence the discomfort of all the authors who wanted to speak of an immortality of the soul. What
is their discomfort? It’s that the immortality of the soul can be grasped or can be conceived only
through the still temporal kinds of a before and an after. And this is already the whole theme of
the Phaedo which deals with the immortality of the soul, in Plato. The dialogue of Plato, Phaedo,
proposes a great doctrine of the immortality of the soul, precisely in the form of the before and
the after, before the union, after the union.

                                                                                                      13

When Spinoza opposed eternity to immortality, you can see quite well what he means. From the
standpoint of immortality, if you will, I can know that the soul is immortal. But what does
immortality consist of? It consists of saying that I know, for example, I then know by what
knowledge -- that's something else -- but I know that my soul does not die with my body. Even if
I admit the Platonic idea that this is a kind of knowledge, I do not know in what form. And
everyone says so. Why? Because immortality indeed seems to exclude the before and the after.
Through this, it’s already an eternity. But precisely it can only be learned or known in kinds of
the before and the after. And Descartes will say it again. In what form? That the soul is immortal,
this I can say, I am sure, according to Descartes. But, in what form? I do not know. I can at most
affirm that, affirm that there is a before and that there is an after, that the soul is not born with the
body and that it does not die with the body. I can affirm the “that”; I cannot assert the “what” or
the “how”. An intellectual intuition would be necessary, as they say... as they say. But we don't
have intellectual intuition. Very well.

Spinoza doesn’t pose the problem in that way because, for him, the problem is not at all a before
and an after; it’s an at the same time as. I mean, it’s at the same time that I am mortal that I
experience that I am eternal. To experience that I am eternal does not mean that there is a before,
that there has been a before, and that there will be an after. It means that, from now forward, I’m
experiencing something that cannot exist within the form of time.

And what is it if it cannot exist within the form of time? Namely, that there are two absolutely
opposite meanings of the word “part”, namely, there are parts that I have. These are the extensive
parts, external to each other, and these, I have them in the time mode. Indeed, I have them
temporarily, I have them within duration. I have them in time mode. These are parts external to
each other, extensive parts that I have. Fine.

But when I say, "intensive part", I mean something completely different. The two meanings of
the word “part” differ in nature. Because when I say, "intensive part equals essence", it is no
longer a part that I have. These are no longer parts that I have. This is a part that I am. I am a
degree of power; I am an intensive part. I am an intensive part, and the other essences are also
intensive parts. Parts of what? Well, parts of the power of God, says Spinoza. Good. He talks like
that, so fine.

To experience that I am eternal is to experience that "part”, in the intensive sense, differs in
nature, coexists and differs in nature from "part” in the extrinsic, extensive sense. I experience
here and now that I am eternal, that is, that I am an intensive part or a degree of power
irreducible to the extensive parts that I have, that I possess. As a result, when the extensive parts
are torn from me, equaling death, that does not concern the intensive part that I am for all
eternity. I experience that I am eternal, but once again, on one condition, provided that I am
raised to ideas and to affects that give this intensive part an actuality. [Pause] It’s in this sense
that I experience that I am eternal.

So, this is an experiment (expérimentation) which means an eternity, but of "coexistence", not an
"immortality" of succession. It is from now forward in my existence that I experience the
irreducibility of the intensive part that I am for all eternity, that I am eternally with the extensive
parts that I have within the form of duration. But, if I have not actualized my essence, or even my

                                                                                                      14

relations, if I have remained within the law of the extensive parts which encounter each other
from outside, at that point, I do not even have the idea to experience that I am eternal. At that
point, when I die, yes, I lose the greatest part of myself. On the other hand, if I made my part
intensive, "proportionally the largest", what does that mean? Here, obviously, there is indeed a
small difficulty. Now it brings into play, if you will, in a kind of proportional calculation, the
extensive parts that I have and the intensive part that I am.

It’s difficult since there is no common nature between the two meanings of the word "part". So
how can he say that one and the other are larger or smaller relative to each other? He tells us:
when I die, sometimes what perishes, namely the extensive parts which go elsewhere, what
perishes from me is in some cases the largest part, in the other case, on the contrary, a fairly
insignificant, fairly small part. It would therefore be necessary that the intensive part and the
extensive parts have some sort of common criterion in order to return to this rule of proportion,
namely, of the two cases, of the two extreme cases in which sometimes the extensive parts that
disappear constitute the largest part of myself, sometimes, on the contrary, they constitute only a
small part of myself because it is the intensive part which took the largest part of myself.

Well, we cannot go any further, namely that perhaps it’s up to us, in existence, to establish this
kind of calculation of proportions or lived sense of proportion. It must be said that, yes, what is
important in a life? Good. What is important? The criterion of importance. What are you going to
give importance to? This is importance. It’s... We must almost give importance to importance.
This, it isn’t important; that, it’s important. We would almost have to make of it a criterion of
existence. What do people judge as important in their lives? Is it... What's important, is it talking
on the radio? Is it creating a stamp collection? Is it good health? Perhaps, all of this... Is it... What
is a happy life in the sense that someone dies saying to himself: after all, I generally did what I
wanted, I did pretty much what I wanted, or what I hoped for? Yes, that’s good. What is this
curious blessing that one can give to oneself and which is the opposite of a self-contentment?

What does that mean, this category, what’s important? No, we agree, that's annoying, but it’s not
important. What is this calculation? Isn't that it? Isn’t it the category of the remarkable or the
important that would allow us to create proportions between the two irreducible meanings of the
word “part”, what depends on and what results from the intensive part of myself and what, on the
contrary, refers to the extensive parts that I have?

So, and then obviously, there is always the problem: premature death. The singular essence
passes into existence, good, and then... I'm a baby that gets crushed. Well. How far does the
Spinozist rule apply, namely: but the time that I last does not matter in the end? Spinoza says it
very firmly, and there, he has the right to say it since he did not die very old, but still, he was not
a crushed baby. [Laughter] He had time to write the Ethics, so still, the babies who die,
Spinoza’s rule: but after all, when I die, it only means one thing, namely, I no longer have
extensive parts.

Here, we are embarrassed when facing the case of premature deaths. Because a premature death
... Fine, we can always say: he has his eternal essence. But this eternal essence, once again, as we
read in Spinoza, is not simply an essence like a mathematical figure. It’s an essence which exists
as an essence only to the extent that it has passed through existence, that is, in which it has

                                                                                                      15

realized its degree, in which it has realized its degree for itself, that is, the intensive part that it
was. It goes without saying that when I die prematurely, I did not realize the intensive part that I
was. In other words, I have not at all expressed, I have not at all "caused to be" the intensity that
I am. So, it's okay when you die, all the same, at a certain age, but all those who die before... I
believe that there, in fact, you must not... You must rather... [Deleuze does not complete this]

If we imagine that a correspondent could have said that to Spinoza, to ask Spinoza that, what
would Spinoza have answered? I don't think that he would have been clever at all with this. He
wouldn't have at all... He would have said something like: well, yes, that it was part of the
irreducible exteriority of nature. You see, it's like everything, the whole cohort of people who
have existed, who will exist, who are poisoned, etc., that this whole problem of the extensive part
of ourselves, was such that in some cases it could indeed make… I would say that, in Spinozist
terms, we must almost say: the one who dies prematurely, well yes, this is a case where death is
imposed in such a way that, it is imposed in such conditions that, at that time, it concerns the
greatest part of the individual concerned.

But what we call a happy life means doing everything we can, and that, Spinoza says formally,
doing everything we can precisely to ward off premature death, that is, to prevent premature
deaths. What does that mean? Not at all preventing death, but acting so that death, when it does
happen, ultimately only concerns the smallest part of me. There we are, I believe, as he saw it,
experienced and felt things. Good. I mean, do you have any reactions, questions to ask?... Yes?
But no theory, just feeling. [Laughter]

A student: I would like to emphasize the fact that in the Ethics, when Spinoza says, "I don't
understand," intelligo, he said “I”. When he wants to cite an example, he says Paul or Peter.
When he says: we feel and we experience, it is a “we” who matter. That means: it's all the
aggregate. In the same way, when he talks about the intellectual love of God in book V, it is:
omnium, it is all together. So maybe premature death can be corrected, in some way, through this
alliance, basically, through this community.

Deleuze: Yes. What you say is quite deeply true because the "we", that means that, on the level
of essences, there can be opposition, once again, only on the level of existences and extensive
parts. So, the essences, they all agree with each other, insofar as being essences. So, to say, in
fact, that these are the essences whose lives have been relatively successful, who can do, who
can take care of these premature deaths, yes, that is fine. You are right. Yes, yes. No doubt, yes.
Yes. [Pause] Did [Spinoza] have an untimely death? To his liking, surely. He didn't have an
untimely death, however; he died before he finished a book he cared about, eh? But certainly, it's
hard to say how someone died, but it's hard to imagine him dying other than ... really telling
himself that he had done what he wanted. Because that's true, he did what he wanted.

The student: He has eternity because eternity… [Interruption of the recording] [1:18:02]

Part 3

Deleuze: ... a consequence, yes.

                                                                                                  16

The student: It makes it easier to distinguish the second kind and the third kind of knowledge,
because at one point, basically, ... you stop differentiating.

Deleuze: Yes, that’s because I didn’t have time, yes, no, I’m not saying, there can be advantages.
You are insisting on a community of essences, yes. Once again, for me, it’s only a consequence;
the community derives from the essences and is not consecutive to essences. It’s true, it’s true, a
difference is indeed possible, in fact. One could conceive a completely different presentation,
which emphasizes the suitability of the essences with each other, above all, yes. I'll tell you; I
think they are only suitable to the extent that they have been successfully realized. So for me, the
suitability is... [Deleuze does not complete this] So, we wouldn't be in disagreement, but again
there too, it's a difference in emphasis; as I always tell you in a reading, you are forced to place
your own accents. Good!... Yes?

Another student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: It’s not what?

The student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: I can answer only on the following point: what does Spinoza tell us about this? Oh
obviously, for him, facing death on one’s own terms (aller au-devant de la mort) is the very type,
it's almost the summit of the inadequate life, and we understand very well why: it's because he
has an idea in which he believes, and I believe that he has an idea, one of the deepest ideas that
we have had. He believes that by nature, death, whatever it is, comes only from outside, that
death fundamentally is the law of the parts external to each other, and that otherwise, the very
idea of death has no meaning, whereas death always comes from outside. Where Spinoza is very
strong, in my opinion, is that he is the only one who completely reconciles the idea that death is
inevitable, and that all death comes from the outside. It’s generally when we say "death comes
from outside", we receive as an objection: ah, but then, if death comes from outside, it has no
necessity; after all, you might not die, this is stupid (idiot). Spinoza affirms at once the radical
exteriority of death, all death is external, all death comes from outside. There is never a death
that comes from within. Spinoza is among those for whom the very idea of a death drive is a
grotesque, absolutely grotesque concept, that it really is... And... Yes?

Richard Pinhas: The writer Armand Farrachi has an intuition that is complementary to Spinoza’s
idea. Except for the possible scenarios of being crushed, the creative person possesses an idea
that we find frequently, notably among musicians. It’s a kind of intimate sense of duration
related to the accident. A particular writer is going to devote his or her whole live – that is, 80
years – to develop his work, giving Victor Hugo as the example, and someone else will take two
years, three years to do his work, here, like Rimbaud and Lautréamont, and indeed at twentyfive, they will be done, while others will have finished at eighty, and we find exactly the same
cases in famous musicians such as Mozart for one case, and Bach for the other. And they say
somehow equivalent things; it cannot be said that the work of Bach is more important than that
of Mozart, or that the work of Hugo is more important than that of Rimbaud. So, everything
happens as if there was a speed of unfolding, a kind of intimate perception of duration given for

                                                                                                    17

the creation of a work and that, at the end, there is this accidental relationship which puts an end
to this work, but in all these cases, the work will be completed.

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes, yes... I even think that we should choose, in addition, some non-sublime
examples, namely non-aesthetic, non-artistic ones. This kind of apprehension, of evaluation, of
time that remains, is a feeling which then is, which is a very, very, deep feeling in existence, and
to what extent? It occurs with what kind of quantity; how does it occur? When people feel like
they don’t have much time left... [they] start organizing, how to say it, tidying up their business,
putting things in their place! Oh, that’s interesting. Fine, so there are those assessments.

What is very important in what Richard says, it seems to me, is that it is not an overall
assessment at all. It is not linked to age, it is not linked to an age, this feeling, in fact, which
comes from the depths and which makes me say: oh, well, maybe I’m reaching the end, I’m
reaching the end, and this is the opposite of panic; all that is the opposite of anxiety. How to
explain it? I come back to this: "death always comes from outside"; yes okay, it always comes
from outside. There is no accidental death. Old age also comes from outside; all that comes from
outside. It is an attrition of the external parts.

So, what is very interesting is that, on the one hand, there are the general laws of the species. I
know that the species implies a particular duration, roughly, a particular overall duration, so
there are general determinations of the species, but ... What does it mean that a species lasts for
so long? For example, a cat lives so many years, a man lives so many years on average. What do
these life averages mean? It means that there are global durations, statistical durations which
mark the time according to which extensive parts belong to a particular essence. A cat essence,
how long does a cat live? Ten years, twelve years ... [A student says: Eighteen years!] Eighteen
years? [Laughter] Monsters, right, normally? [Laughter] Okay, well, those are lucky cats, eh?
Eighteen years for a cat, oh là là... What a disaster! Well! Well eighteen years, it's huge, no? I
think that’s an exceptional cat. [Laughter] Humans currently live, I don't know, what's the
average length of time? [Some suggestions] The time during which, once again, the extensive
parts belong to me, in relations that characterize me.

Fine! But what makes these extensive parts belong to me and cease belonging to me, all of that is
in the realm of extrinsic accidents, just that extrinsic accidents have laws. It's obvious that they
have laws. So, in this sense, death is absolutely necessary, it is absolutely inevitable, but it
always responds to laws that regulate the relations between parts external to each other. It’s in
this sense that it always comes from outside. Simply, precisely, as Spinoza says all the time: "I
am a part of nature", that is, I am open onto this entire world of exteriority. In this sense, death is
inevitable; the more it comes from the outside, the more it is needed. There we are, there we are!

Georges Comtesse: There is a problem ... [Inaudible] ... Death comes from outside, if it comes
from outside, there is, coming from outside, an affection, [Pause] a mortal affection which
comes from outside and which passes into the interior. The problem arises or would arise if there
is an adequate idea of affection, and if the affects of which Spinoza speaks can, above all joy or
sadness, can bring about an adequate idea of mortal affection as coming... that would be a
problem that would arise for Spinoza. We must not forget that there are certain texts by Spinoza
in which he says: he is like a sick person, and a sick person who will die, who will sink if he

                                                                                                     18

precisely does not find a path toward salvation. When Spinoza speaks like that in the first texts, it
is not simply a death which comes from outside; it is the effect of an affection, or an impulse
which causes a disease and, for this disease, a cure must be found. And the cure is a form of
thought or precisely a form of knowledge, as he says. But one cannot simply say, without
remaining at a very simple axiom: death simply comes from outside.

For example, for example, there are certain images which take part in affection; it’s
incomprehensible if one left the lethal affection within the axiom of the radical exteriority. For
example, I think of a text by Henry Miller, for example, in The World of Sex. Henry Miller
relates not an event; he is seeking, for example, as we said earlier, as some attempt to forget their
whole existence, certain events, but he is speaking in The World of Sex of an almost
unforgettable event, and that still affects him, and so he does not understand at all either what
produces this affection in him, or what brings about this occurrence of affection when he thinks
that it’s the event, or he says when he saw the sex of a little girl for the first time, he immediately
had a very strange impression that this little girl was splitting in two -- he was eight years old, he
said -- this little girl was immediately splitting in two, and there arose a superimposed man with
an iron mask, and this is a very strange experience. And so, well, the man in the iron mask said
to him, there is a whole series starting from there, he speaks of an African mask and the same
hallucination of the man in the iron mask, he says "that there must be a connection between
excitement and so-called virile aggressiveness", and precisely this event there, he does not
understand the connection. So here we have a type of even secondary affection which, for a
writer, well, in his very experience of writing, he doesn’t manage to express to himself. So, there
are silent or unspeakable affections. And the problem that arises when we talk about, when we
want to axiomatize death by saying that it is a death that comes from outside, it’s the problem
precisely both of unspeakable affection and of effects of affection that arise, and precisely series
of events based on its effects.

Deleuze: Well, I admit that I understand everything you say. It may even seem very interesting,
but I admit that, in my opinion, it’s not at all Spinozist …

Comtesse: Ah, but I didn't say it was Spinozist!

Deleuze: Ah okay! Because Spinoza would not speak about death that comes from outside, he
does not think that, henceforth, it necessarily passes within. Because if you have understood,
there is no interiority at this level in Spinoza. Everything is exterior, and it remains exterior.

The only interiority as Spinoza conceives it is -- and he uses the word – is, instead of singular
essence, he will speak of intimate essence. The singular essence is, in fact, defined by intimacy.
What does that mean? It means that, insofar as it’s an intensive part, it has an interiority, it has an
interiority. What does its interiority consist of? Strangely enough, the interiority of a degree of
power (puissance) is the manner in which it encompasses in itself the other degrees of power,
and this is one of the great differences between extensive parts and intensive parts. Any intensive
part whatsoever is a pars intima, that is, an intimate part. What does an intimate part mean? Once
again, this is very specific; that means that a degree of power, as such, encompasses in itself --
and the lower degrees of power, they do not get mixed in -- but it encompasses in itself both the
lower degrees of power and the higher degrees of power. It’s in this way that all the essences

                                                                                                       19

agree with each other by virtue of this intimacy of all the essences within each essence. What
you said earlier, I could repeat at the level of the suitability of essences and of this intimacy of
essences. So, there is an interiority at this level for Spinoza, and at the level of existence and
extensive parts, there is only exteriority, there is no interiority.

So, the affects which depend on the extensive parts remain only affects of exteriority. As a result,
I believe that Spinoza could not embrace the formulation that Comtesse just used, namely, "an
affect from outside necessarily passes within". It cannot pass within since internal affect can only
be an affect "of essence insofar as being essence", insofar as being an intensive part, insofar as
being a degree of power. Whereas [for] the affects coming from outside, this can only be affects
that depend on the interactions between parts external to each other. There is no communication
between the two. I can go from the first kind to the second kind or to the third. An affect of the
first kind, a passion affect does not pass into the interior, that is, does not become affect of
essence.

So, your whole development is very interesting, with an example to raise goosebumps! You
understand how Miller… Miller is a funny author in this regard, as far as what concerns us here,
because there are really pages which are undoubtedly Spinozist in Miller, but he isn’t a Spinoza
commentator, so he is entirely within his rights. Sometimes he proceeds with the coherence of
his own inspiration, [and] he has some very, very Spinozist elements of inspiration. This goes
back to all of Henry Miller’s pantheism, and then he has inspirations that come completely from
elsewhere, if only a whole side that comes to him from Dostoevsky, and then the best, the most
beautiful [is] what comes to him from within himself, namely what makes all his inspirations
consistent with one another, agree with each other.

And to what extent, if you will, the whole element that you have developed is obviously nonSpinoza, it is not difficult if you remember Spinoza’s ideal. Spinoza’s ideal -- I did not bring it
up again, but I take this opportunity to do so here -- is really that the world of inadequacy and
passion is the world of equivocal signs; it’s the world of obscure and equivocal signs. And what
you have developed in a Miller-like style is the example of an obscure sign. And for Spinoza
here, Spinoza is without any nuance: you drag yourself into the first kind of knowledge; you drag
yourself through the worst existence as long as you stick to equivocal signs. Whether these signs
are those of sexuality, or those of theology, or anything else, no matter where these signs come
from, whether they are signs of the prophet, or signs of the lover, it's all the same. It's all the
same. This is the world of equivocal signs. And, on the other hand, the entire ascent towards the
second kind and the third kind of knowledge is to suppress to the maximum -- which is always to
say “to the maximum” by virtue of the law of proportions; we are condemned, of course, there
will always be equivocal signs, we will always be under their law, it’s the same law as the law of
death -- but the more you can substitute for equivocal signs, the domain of univocal expressions,
and it's so ... [Deleuze does not complete this]

So, the problem of sex, The World of Sex, well obviously, Spinoza would not have written a
book on the world of sex. Why wouldn't he write about the world of sex? Why is it that, for
Spinoza, here, I don't need to replace him, it's obvious here that he tells us something about it, he
would say to us: “Oh but it exists, it exists, sexuality exists. It’s even whatever you want,
whatever you want, but it’s your business. Do you make it the main part of your existence or a

                                                                                                   20

relatively secondary part?” Why for him, he would say on his own behalf, obviously this is also a
question of temperament. By nature, I believe that Spinoza was basically someone chaste, like all
philosophers first of all, and especially him. I say, why? Why? It’s very ingrained, if you will,
from a Spinozist perspective. For him, sexuality is inseparable from the obscurity of signs.

If there was unequivocal sexuality, ah, he would be completely in favor; it’s not that he’s against
sexuality. If you could draw out and experience univocal expressions within sexuality, he would
say to you: "Go ahead, go ahead, that's what you have to do." But now, it turns out, is he wrong
or is he right? Are there unequivocal loves? It would seem, rather, and it seems that we have
gone entirely in this direction, that far from discovering resources of univocity in sexuality, we
have, on the contrary, juggled, caused the equivocity of the sexual to proliferate, and it has been
one of the greatest successes of psychoanalysis to develop in every sense the extraordinary
equivocity of the sexual. So, the Spinoza criteria here, it's not about... It's about first
understanding them. Spinoza would say: "You understand, you mustn't blame me," but Spinoza
would say, tell us, "That doesn't interest me very much" because he would say: "you privilege
sexuality... [one musn’t] privilege sexuality to this extent because if you stick to the equivocal
signs, you find them everywhere. [You] shouldn't worry about it. You can be a prophet as well,
you can be a prophet, you can be perverse, you can be a prophet, you don't have to go looking for
stuff about... about bisexuality, for example, or about the mystery of sex, or about the mystery of
birth. Signs, take them wherever you want, if you like equivocal signs."

But once it’s said that Spinozism -- if it is true what I proposed to you, is almost the
interpretation, the only point of interpretation to which I held since the beginning of these
sessions on Spinoza -- if really Spinozism is a practical effort that tells us, for those who would
agree with such a project, with such an attempt, it tells us something that you understand: what
causes your sorrow, your anguish, is precisely that you live in a world of equivocal signs. And
what I, Spinoza, am proposing to you, is a kind of concrete effort to replace this world of the
obscure, this world of night, this world of the equivocal sign, with a world of another nature
which you are going to extract from the first, you are not going to oppose from the outside, you
are going to extract from the first with great care and which is a world of unequivocal
expressions.

In this, Spinoza would be quite modern, quite like us. As for sexuality, he thinks that there is not,
that there is no univocal expression of the sexual. So, in a way, okay, it comes from outside, it
comes from outside. That is, go ahead, but don’t make it the greatest part of yourself, because if
it is the greatest part of yourself, at that point, when death arrives, or as well, when impotence
arrives, the legitimate impotence of age, when all this comes, well, you will lose the greatest part
of yourself. Yes, Spinoza’s idea is very odd; it’s that ultimately, "the biggest part of myself will
be which I will have done during my existence as being the biggest part of myself." So, if I
choose a mortal part, if I make a mortal part the greatest part of myself, well, at the extreme, I die
entirely by dying and I die in despair...

A woman student: Yes but...

Deleuze: Yes?

                                                                                                   21

The woman student: For me, I think, so if we hold onto the knowledge of the second kind as do
most, because even about this condition of the third genre, we dare not speak of it, we don't talk
about it, so if we limit ourselves to this condition of the second kind, what happens, what occurs?

Deleuze: Ah, that’s fine, that works as well. One should say instead, "What are we missing if we
stick to the third kind?"

The student: Why? It must give us something... [Deleuze speaks at the same time: Yes, yes, no,
yes] It must give us something...

Deleuze: Yes, that's absolutely true. What is missing is that I believe here... it’s that, in the
knowledge of the second kind, we understand everything... [Pause] about what? We understand
everything about relations, and there we can go no further than in the area of relations. What
does that mean? That means that we understand the relation, the respective relations between
three individuals. Why do I say between three individuals, and not between two or four? Because
the relationship between three individuals is the privileged example, A, B, C. I call A, a first
individual; I call B a second individual outside the first, and I call C the individual composed by
A and B. See why, in this privileged example, I need three individuals. Two individuals who
make up their relations necessarily form a third individual. Example: the chyle and the lymph to
take Spinoza’s example. The chyle and the lymph are parts of the blood; that means, there is an
individual, chyle, an individual, lymph, insofar as each in a relation, insofar as their relations are
composed, they compose blood, the third individual. So, the second kind of knowledge tells me
everything about the relations that compose and decompose individuals.

What is it not telling me? Well, it does not inform me about the singular nature or the essence of
each individual considered, namely it does not tell me what the essence of A is, what the essence
of B is, let alone what the essence of C is. It tells me how C applies to A and B. You see, that's
exactly it; it tells me how the nature of blood applies to the nature of chyle and the nature of
lymph since chyle and lymph compose blood.

The previous student: So if I stick to the definition, something essential escapes me, that is, what
the essence is, and consequently, at death, the greatest part ought to be saved; we remain
[Inaudible], I believe.

Deleuze: Yes, we do, there we are, so there, you are asking, in fact, a very, very precise question,
but that, I did not develop it, not because we cannot develop it, but because that it becomes fairly
theoretical. I am saying this for those who are interested in this point; it’s how does one, in fact,
pass according to Spinoza from the second kind to the third kind: why don't we just stay within
the second kind? There, the text for those who will go all the way to book V -- what I am hoping
for all here; I am pointing out something which is, given the extraordinarily difficult character of
this book V, I am saying why, that the speed of demonstrations, there is something fantastic at
the same time, it is a text of beauty! I mean, it's thinking that has reached a level of flight speed,
at full speed; it's very curious, this book V -- well, here, if I try to decompose: the second kind
proceeds through common notions. Common notions are ideas of relation; once again, this is not
at all general or abstract notions; these are the characteristic notions of relations, these are the
compositions of relations, that’s what the common notions are.

                                                                                                    22

But these are the common notions which are composed relations, which are therefore the ideas of
a composition of relations that always lead us -- this is the first moment of Spinozist reasoning --
are always linked to the idea of God. That’s strange, and what does it mean? It means a very
simple thing: that when we want to consider notions of compositions of relations in nature, you
cannot get the proper idea of a composed relation without at the same time forming an idea of
God as the basis of the relations which are composed. So, you normally and necessarily go from
the common notion to the idea of God as the foundation of all relations. In fact, the idea of God,
is defined at this level; at this level, it would be defined like this, "the foundation of all
compositions of relations".

But then you see that the idea of God is very strange in Spinoza. I mean, on the one hand, it is
necessarily linked to the common notion, to the idea of relations that are composed, but on the
other hand, at the same time, it is not a common notion. It’s more, it’s something more. So, there
the idea of God becomes very bizarre, indeed. It is not the idea of the relations which are
composed; it is the idea of a veritable concrete foundation for all the compositions of relations.
That’s fine, it’s the idea of an infinite being, as founding all of the relations that are composed.
The idea of God is therefore more than a relation that’s composed, and yet it is linked to the idea
of relations that are composed.

So, I necessarily go from the common notion, that is, from the second kind of knowledge, to the
idea of God. And there, the idea of God, therefore, is exactly, I do not see any other [means] to
have you understand, it is as if the idea of God had two sides in Spinoza. On one side, it is turned
towards the side of common notions. In fact, it is turned to the side of common concepts because
it is the foundation of all relations that are composed, and that common notions are always the
enunciation of this or that relation that is composed. So, here we have one side turned towards
common notions. And, I necessarily go from the common notion to the idea of God.

But once I'm in the idea of God, I realize that there is something more in the idea of God than in
common notions, such that it has a side turned to something else, which is what? Namely, God as
"container", as itself being an essence which contains all the essences, namely all the singular
essences are encompassed in the idea of God. All the singular essences are encompassed,
contained in the idea of God, such that the idea of God is like the pivot which makes us pass
necessarily from the second kind to the third kind.

Does that solve everything? Yes and no, because very oddly -- and I say that to finish because it
is very important in book V, if you follow -- when you read book V well, you will see that God,
in book V, is successively, at several propositions distance between them, is presented as, and
under, two absolutely different portraits, to the point that some have said "but all that is not okay,
it's not okay, we can't contradict each other to that extent, within just few pages distance”, and
Spinoza feels no need whatsoever to resolve the apparent contradictions, so precisely, I believe,
they are apparent. If we follow the order of the text well, we are not bothered by this.

Because in a first series of texts, he explains that we love God, but that God does not return it to
us; this is an impassive God. The idea of God gives us the idea of an impassive God, who
composes all relations, but who is not affected; we love it, and it does not love us, if you will. It's
like a resurrection of the old Epicurean God. You don't expect it to reciprocate; it doesn't matter.

                                                                                                   23

And a few pages later, in the love that we have for God, the love of the third kind this time, in
the love of the third kind that we have for God, it is God who itself, who loves itself, through our
love for it, and it is God who loves us, through our love for it, where there we have a kind of
identity of our love for God, of love of God for itself and love of God for us. What is that? This
is the third kind of knowledge.

What does that mean? But the contradiction, I don't see it; it does not bother me at all in any
case. I would say, the first kind of texts is the idea of God as it relates to the second kind of
knowledge, and the second kind of texts is the idea of God related to the third kind of
knowledge. As long as God is grasped only as the basis of relations which are composed, it is an
impassive God, namely anything is composed very well, everything is good, etc. When one
passes to the singular essences obviously, the idea of God changes its sense. From the second to
the third kind, it cannot be the same idea of God, because this time, it is the idea of God as being
an essence that contains all the essences. The absolutely infinite essence which contains all the
degrees of power, the power, or as he says, "has absolutely infinite power which contains all the
degrees of power". So, there is a very strong reason for God to have two successive portraits. But
it's as if he made two successive pictures of a very Epicurean kind of impassive God and then, on
the contrary, a mystical God, the mystical God of the third kind who, through the love we have
for it, loves itself and loves us.

The previous student: And that doesn't return into this interiority of the degree of [Inaudible]…

Deleuze: Completely, it's the same thing; it’s exactly the same thing, there you have intimacy;
there is only intimacy...

Richard Pinhas: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: No, not really ... Yes, he calls that God, yes ...

Pinhas: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Common notions, here, I’ll tell you, that’s a very good question because all of these are
very practical questions. I am translating your question; I am translating it like this for my
benefit: can one be a moderate Spinozist? [Laughter] I mean, a moderate Spinozist would be a
Spinozist who would say, well yes, I'm going that far, but I can't, it seems, forgive me, but I can't
go any further. So, Richard asks us, can we be a Spinozist who remains at the second kind of
knowledge and who is content with it. I am very happy with this question.

Pinhas: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Ah, didn’t I get that right?

Pinhas: In all the developments that you’ve presented, at no time does one feel the need for this
foundation. So, my question is: when and why did Spinoza experience the need for a foundation?
I'm trying to understand.

                                                                                                    24

Deleuze: I would say, on two levels. He feels the need for a foundation because he has the
intimate conviction -- since once again, we are not trying to understand theoretical reasons here -
- he has the intimate conviction that the idea of God cannot be treated as a simple common
notion, that the idea of God is necessarily the idea of a being both infinite and singular, that
henceforth, an infinite being, common notions could give it to us, but a being at the same time
infinite and singular, no. There is something in the idea of God, it’s the idea of a being; it is not
the idea of a relation. Common notions are ideas of relations, of rapports.

So nevertheless, I’m returning once again anyway, although I misunderstood your intervention,
if I return to my question: is a mutilated, truncated Spinozism conceivable which would stop at
the second kind of knowledge and which would say, “Well no, the rest, it's not okay, I'm not for
the rest." I would feel very much in favor of a mutilated Spinozism. I find that at the level of
common notions, it's perfect, it's fine, it's fine, for a simple reason. But at that point, there is a
condition in order for there to be a truncated Spinozism. To be a mutilated Spinozist, you really
have to believe that there is no essence, that there are only relations. If I believe that there are
only relations and no essence, that goes without saying, the third kind of knowledge, I don't need
it, not only I don't need it, but it loses all meaning. So, one has to see... You can be truncated
Spinozist only if you think that, ultimately, there is no Being, there are only relations.

Okay, but if you think that there is Being, if you think that the word essence is not an empty
word, then you cannot stop at common notions. You cannot say that there are relations, there
must be a foundation for relations, that is, relations must be grounded in Being. This is how the
idea of God is more than a common notion. A common notion is an idea of relations. Saying the
idea of God is both linked to common notions, but it goes beyond, it goes beyond the common
notion, you see what he means, it's very simple, he means relations must indeed surpass
themselves towards something that exists. There must be a Being. [Pause]

Pinhas: Without being radical, I would give an example, I think... We say, "okay for relations",
and yet I will tell you, for example, for me as a musician, I need essences. We had seen at a
certain point, several years ago, that concerning a particular type of sound, but we can also find
this in painting, we have wood essence, we have metal essence, we have, in short, something that
objectively goes beyond simple relations. All that does not persuade me, the fact that I myself
need, practically, these essences, that the painter needs these essences to express these lights,
does not imply a principle of uniqueness which would be the essence that we understand as an
essence. [Deleuze: Okay] Ultimately, this wouldn't even be entrusted to the level of relations.

Deleuze: No, you aren’t doing a truncated Spinozism, but rather you’re doing a mutant
Spinozism. [Laughter] Your radical transformation, you say, "I will keep the essences", so this is
not where I would distinguish myself. I would remain much more modest, but... Eh, you aren’t
keeping the essences, but you completely transform the Spinozist meaning of the word essence.
So, in fact, what you yourself are calling "essence" is ultimately something which is on the order
of "the event". It is "the event of wood", it is wood as an "event", and not as a thing, and Spinoza
retains for the word "essence" the absolutely traditional meaning it has in philosophy, that is,
"what the thing is", as opposed to the accident. On the other hand, you are making a revolution
which supposes modern philosophy, namely "essence is the accident". [Pinhas tries to interrupt

                                                                                                     25

and contradict Deleuze] Yes, yes, yes, it is, that's what you're doing ... [Laughter] Yes it, yes,
yes, yes. You’re not doing that? So, what are you doing?

Pinhas: Of course, when you state that wood as an event is going to be, metal as an event, it’s
going to be effectively a dominant factor… [Inaudible] that we are going beyond towards
something, this “towards something”, it’s, it’s something that is not at all the domain of the
event, it would be, I can say that tautologies ...

Claire Parnet: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: [to Parnet] Ah, there you want a lot ...

Pinhas: … the idea, for example, the idea of pure metal, as opposed to the events that the
metallic event can produce, [Inaudible]… the idea of pure metal, I can't describe it, but it's
something that I can conceive of.

Deleuze: Obviously, you manage to conceive of it, obviously, but what is your idea of pure
metal? There we could take, I see very well, we would ask Spinoza what a metal is for him. He
would give a definition through essence, and I'm sure you could give one, but it would be a
definition that implies a completely different sense of essence. For me, if someone asks me, "a
pure metal today, what is it?”, this is essentially what could be called an "operative essence".
Essence designates what emerges, what emerges from things as a result of a certain type of
operation. So, what operations introduce essence? There, you will have to ask yourself that. So,
fine, even if I say that, I can't say it well. But if you will, essence in the sense which seems to me
current is something which is inseparable from a certain type of operation, which one causes to
occur, in which one causes the thing to occur, for example, the essence of a piece of wood, and
there, we can see in what sense the essence is singular, the essence of a piece of wood. This can
be seen on the wood plane – I’m saying on the wood plane, but the musician would say
something else; a carpenter would say it shows by shaving [the wood] -- you don't even have two
woods of the same kind, which... the wood fibers... And this relation... What?

Pinhas: You're reducing the idea of essence. I really meant essence in the strong sense…

Deleuze: But, so did I!

Pinhas: … that is, something that’s not simply an operative essence. So, I’m choosing an
example to try to explain because this is something quite important. Fine, when you say that a
relation is eternal, that an essence is something eternal, well, I was thinking of a piece of music.
A music piece does not exist until it’s performed, indeed; a sound only exists as performed, but
at the same time, we know very well that there is, for a completed musical form, which might be
a piece that acts, a perfect piece, there is only one possible form, there is only one possible
expression, that is, in fact that it be performed or not, happening…

Deleuze: I had an almost (inaudible) example…

                                                                                                     26

Pinhas: … the perfect form of a melody occurs, whether it is performed or not; this concerns us,
but it does not concern its essence. And we can say that a perfect melody has an essence, at least
I hope in any case, and at that level, when I would say that a particular melody has a metallic
essence, the fact that it occurs by metallic instruments or not is only a secondary matter. So that's
why the essence of this melody will be a close essence, in any case, I’m thinking of the classical
essence, at least, in the classical sense of its definition, but not at all an operative essence,
[Deleuze grunts, seeming to disagree] effectively afterwards, we will find some operative
relations.

Deleuze: It’s you who don’t understand because you despise carpenters. It's obvious in what you
are saying.

Pinhas: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: You’re answering me... No, so here, be careful, here, this gets very interesting for me,
because you’re answering me, "we must not speak of an operative essence because the operative,
it ultimately does not concern that the physical material (matériau)”, and there, you substitute for
my example of the carpenter, you substitute an example of musical piece, which is quite good,
that you have explained quite well, your musical example. But I would say, if we place ourselves
at the level of your musical example, it’s quite obvious that [if] your melody is performed by a
particular wood or rather than by a particular other one, this operational aspect is very, very
secondary compared... [Interruption of the session] [2:04:57]6 [to essence. You are completely
right to say that there is a melodic essence there; there is a melodic essence which is not at all
confused with the materials proper to the performance of the melody. But that’s at the level of
your musical example. Now try to put yourself at the carpenter's level. When I say, there is the
wood plane which operates on the wood, which brings out its essence,]

Part 4

…it’s not at all because the carpenter is reduced to physical material; on the contrary, it’s
because at his level, the essence of the wood, the wood shaving operation on the level of
carpentry, causes to emerge the equivalent of your melodic essence. It’s in relation to music that
you can reduce the wood shaving operation to an operation which bears only on the physical
material. But if you consider this wood shaving operation in itself, it does not at all bear on a
physical material.

Pinhas: I don't know if I'm going to be able to say, in the end, that the wood shaving operation on
such a piece of wood is eternal. Or at some level of evidence, you can always tell me that the
plane's relation to the piece of wood is eternal, that's true.

Deleuze: Exactly like a…

Pinhas: … like, like the act of creating.

Deleuze: No, it is not the relation [to creating], no more than in music, you would not accept to
say: it’s the relation of the bow on the strings. The bow’s relation on the strings is realization

                                                                                                          27

(effectuation), these are, these are coefficients of realization. The relation of the plane on the
wood is also a certain sort of realization. But what is not at all a realization is that this operation
brings out an essential difference from this particular piece of wood, even within the same kind,
there are no two similar trees at this level, no two trees whose lines, fibers, have the same
coefficients of resistance, the same degree of permeability, etc., etc. ... And at this level, it seems
to me that there is an essence of wood, just as there was an essence of melody. But finally, we
are getting bogged down in all this.

Pinhas: But fine.

Deleuze: Yes, I'm going back to your story.

Pinhas: Yes, the internal necessity at this level. I, I accept this idea, I, I accept it, I admit it, but I
don't understand why ...

Deleuze: The why? Well, it’s you who just said it, I don’t understand, it’s you who just
demonstrated it masterfully…

Claire Parnet: Yes indeed ...

Deleuze: You just stated it in a music story, I have my three aspects. You are saying: in a
melody, I do have [Parnet: if there is an essence ...] coefficients of performance (effectuation)
which is equivalent, there, to extensive parts in the instruments with which I incarnate, I perform
my melody. [There] is indeed the system of melodic relations, and then you say, there is
something more, there is an essence... [Parnet: an essence].

Pinhas: But the essence is not a foundation (fondement).

Parnet: But, yes it is, because aren’t you the one creating it?!

Deleuze: Isn’t it indeed a foundation of relations, of melodic relations? You have the agents of
the melody’s performance, the melodic relations. And you are saying, there is an essence, this
essence which has the disadvantage of being called foundation?

Pinhas: You understand, I am very perplexed (ennuyé) because I do see the need for a foundation
in the sense of… behind a plane of proposition, in the most precise (propre) and most real sense
possible, there is, there is a need for a plane of foundation. But what do I call the plane of
foundation in this case? It means an articulated whole, in fact. Yes, I, I'm not sure that this, this,
what I’m calling foundation in this case, this, this need for articulation, from which will emerge
what is called a concept of “creation” between quotes, corresponds to the notion of foundation
in, in Spinoza. I don't have that impression at all.

Deleuze: I don't understand Richard, because you seem to me to be going and you seem to be
escaping in all directions.

Pinhas: But I'm looking...

                                                                                                     28

Deleuze: When I propose, yes, you don't want one or the other. When I propose a modest
Spinozism which would limit itself to the second kind of knowledge, you tell me: "oh well no,
that's not what I want; it is necessary, I necessarily need to keep a sense of the essences". Well
then, when I say to you: well, fine then, where is the problem? This is very good, then. At that
point, let’s maintain the integral Spinozism, and you answer me, "ah well no, I don’t see how the
essences are foundations.” So, I start over again at that point, let's be content with a restricted
Spinozism.

Parnet: That doesn't suit you.

Deleuze: And that doesn't suit you. In a way, it’s very cheerful, it’s what suits you; it’s from
yourself that you’ll find it. [Pinhas doesn't seem to agree] You don't want to. No, but I mean, I
don't get your attitude because, well then, if I tell you, okay...

Pinhas: Um, um, anyway, okay I, fine, the idea of God doesn't necessarily bother me, I’m saying,
good.

Deleuze: I understand that, we don't care, everyone, that it's called that, "idea of God", that
doesn't change anything. You can call it "being", you can call it "temple", you can call it
whatever you want.

Pinhas: It may be me who’s misunderstanding the notion of foundation in Spinoza. I must grasp
this idea.

Deleuze: Foundation? [Parnet: It's easy] A foundation, it’s is not difficult. There, foundation
doesn’t yield any particular meaning. He uses the word very rarely, eh, to my knowledge. Yes,
once there is the word "foundation", in Latin; the foundation is the reason for something which
differs in nature from the thing founded. This is the simplest meaning, namely, a foundation of
the relation; it means: something that accounts for the relation and that is not a relation.

So why does Spinoza want a foundation for relations? Because, he thinks – and here, this is very
much in line with the 17th century -- he thinks finally that relations cannot be thought on their
own, that there has to be a purer, deeper Being than the relation. The relation must ultimately be
internal to something. He does not want to think of relations that would be pure exteriorities.
Okay, so you, if you say, do you agree with that… Do you agree with it or not?

Pinhas: Yes, yes.

Deleuze: If you as well don't want to think about relationships in a pure state, in fact, what you
add as a foundation is something that can be called an essence. [Pause] No? You're going to
think about it, OK?

Comtesse: We could even say, perhaps, to return to this question, that in Spinoza's discourse,
perhaps the idea, the very idea of crossing over signs, equivocal signs towards univocal
expressions or towards a one-way or towards a world of relations, this very idea, this very

                                                                                                    29

crossing of signs necessarily supposes for its accomplishment, for Spinoza even to think even
that it might be accomplished, there must necessarily be an idea of a truth…

Deleuze: That's for certain; there, you are right…

Comtesse: So the absolutely infinite being must necessarily be thought of as truth, and we must
also think of truth as the immanent cause of all the powers (puissances) of Being ...

Deleuze: I completely agree there…

Comtesse: … without which, the crossing and the one-way are not comprehensible.

Deleuze: Namely, and here to please you, you have to think of light.

Comtesse: One cannot ...

Deleuze: ... and I tried, the, it's a world, it's a world that is necessarily light.

Comtesse: One cannot think of crossing in the end without a third kind.

Deleuze: One cannot think of crossing without the third kind, okay. That, I would say – so be it,
this bothers me -- let's even say, it’s not certain, but let's say and in any case, we can't think of
the third kind without, a reference to light, to pure light because it’s light that is the opposite of
equivocity. Univocal expressions, indeed, univocal expressions could be of the second kind, they
are moving in any case towards an absolutely necessary medium which is the world of light
where there is no more shadow. While the equivocal signs are really chiaroscuro, really the
shadows, it's really all that we’re saying, but a world of pure light, that's why it's Spinoza’s only
metaphor, perpetually light, light…. What time is it?

Claire Parnet: There’s a boy over there…

A student: 12:30 p.m, 12:33.

Deleuze: Okay, ah, [A student has a question that is hard to hear] Yes, yes, yes, yes, try to speak
as loud as you can.

Student 3: I wanted to talk to you about the distinction [Inaudible]…

Parnet: You need to speak louder.

Deleuze: I, I will repeat, if I can hear, I will repeat what he says.

Student 3: I’m saying that I would like to speak to you about the moral problem ... [Inaudible] ...
You felt the need to introduce into this course the idea of a test on the scale of life by making the
distinction without, without developing it, of the morality... And I’m asking to what extent there

                                                                                                        30

can be in Spinoza a total distinction with morality if he defines life as progress or as actualization
of the intensive parts, as the realization of essence…

Deleuze: I can answer that, because here, for me, it is relatively easy. I can answer before you're
done, or else do I wait until you're done? [Pause, negotiations between students] So, I won’t
answer right away? Is there something else after that, what you have to say, or not? [The student
responds] What?... So, go ahead, yes?

Student 3: I’m wondering precisely if, if we keep thinking in terms of essence like that, [and] if
we don't have the dimension and specificity of the use of the word "essence" in Spinoza, I’m
wondering if, as soon as we talk about essence, if we do not leave immanence, and we are
necessarily led to, to judge life, to place it before a court, and [Deleuze: well ...] it is all, all the
separation of dualism at the level of, of the world of equivocity, and is that pursuing the line in,
in what I will call a meaningless tragic world? I wonder if there is a nuance there that could in
Spinoza ... [Inaudible because of various background noises and voices near the microphone]

Deleuze: Those are good questions. Oh there, in my opinion, I’m answering because, in addition,
these are questions for which the answer is relatively clear this time, it seems to me. I would say
this: in my opinion, in my opinion, you can always say, after all, doesn't he reintroduce
something like a morality? You defined morality very well. I believe that morality cannot be
between, for me, it is essentially the system of judgment. It’s the judgment system. There is no
other sense of morality, namely, there is a morality when I am judged from one point of view or
another, whatever it is; morality is the autonomy of judgment.

So, I'm not saying at all that it's wrong, but that's it, something, anything that’s being judged,
that’s morality. The book, the only moral book, there is only one moral book in the world, that’s
the Apocalypse. And the Apocalypse is not the story of the end of the world; it’s the story of the
last judgment and the preparation, the preparations for the last judgment. The moralist is a man
of judgment to the point that I would even say, all judgment is moral. Judgements exist only as
moral. (Il n’y a de jugements que moraux)

So, the objection is to say, isn’t there still something in the idea of a test (épreuve)? I am
clarifying: for Spinoza, in my opinion, he himself tells us, "there is never any autonomy in
judgment". He says that formally in his theory of knowledge. And what does he mean when he
says, "there is never any autonomy of judgment"? He means, judgment is never just the
consequence of an idea. There is not a faculty of judging whose ideas would be the object, but
what we call a judgment is nothing other than the manner in which an idea is affirmed or is
mutilated. This is important.

So, there is no judgment for him; it is the same thing to say, there is no judgment, there is no
autonomy of judgment, or to say, judgment is only the consequence, is only the development of
the idea. And, he never returns to it, there is no judgment. And yet, he tells us, in particular, he
says explicitly in a letter, he talks about existence as a test.

I think he has a very, very good idea in this regard, quite practical. He means, you know,
judgments, well, the way you are judged, all that, that’s not what matters. Of course, there is a

                                                                                                       31

system of judgment; for him, religion, morality, this is a system of judgment, and that’s what he
denounces. So, what does he mean when he denounces the system of judgment? He means
ultimately, there is only one thing that matters, it is not the way you are judged, it is that
ultimately, whatever you do, it is always you who judge yourself.

Notice what he means: but there is so much less of a problem with judgment since it’s you who
are judging yourself. What are you judged by? What judges you are not values that are external
to you. It is the affects that come to fill up your mode of existence. You exist in this or that way.
Well, this mode of existence is filled, it is realized by affects. What judges you is the nature of
your kinds of sadness and joys. So, you judge yourself.

And there, Spinoza is merciless, right, because he has both extremely tender sides and then
extremely hard sides; you can feel it through the texts. There are things he can't stand. He can't
stand the man who causes his own suffering. He can't stand the whole race of masochists,
depressive people; these he can't stand. You will say to me, [it is] easy not to stand for this. But,
no, these are the questions of value attributed to this or that thing.

He thinks that this is misery, right, that it’s the depths of misery, right, that the guy who fills up
his existence with sad affects, well, he judges himself. In what sense? In the sense that he has
created for himself the worst, the worst mode of existence. No doubt he could not have done
otherwise. All that doesn’t matter, but, and Spinoza goes very far; he tells us, these are people so
contagious and that they want only for sadness to spread, so it’s necessary to be without mercy.
They are judging themselves.

In other words, there is no morality. Or I say the same thing in another way, he tells us about the
test, but I made it clear in fact earlier, alas too quickly, that this is not a moral test. The moral test
is the ordeal in a court. The ordeal in a court is that you are tried, you are sentenced. In the
Apocalypse, this whole wonderful and horrible and, well, abject book, it's a fascinating book, so
beautiful and so abominable, yes, it consists in telling us, careful, right, and then a whole system,
there are secondary judgments, stays (attentes), it’s a kind of incredible procedure which is set
up in that book, the Apocalypse.

Well, that doesn’t exist at all in Spinoza. The test that he talks about is something else entirely.
He's talking about a test, I said, a physicochemical test. What does this mean? There, it is not a
judgment in the moral sense, that is, in a court; it’s like a judgment, a self-experimentation. Selfexperimentation is not even like testing a clay vase or a piece of gold. Imagine a gold piece that
would test itself. When I talk about a fake coin, I’m choosing the example, you complete it, I
won’t develop the clay example, it's the same. Spinoza invokes the clay example.

There are many ways for a coin to be false, for a gold coin to be false. A first way to be false is
it’s not gold. A second way of being false, it has some gold, but not in the true proportion that
defines the coin, the corresponding real coin; it has less gold than the true one. A third way of
being false is the most interesting for counterfeiters, in the end, the least dangerous, because they
are very difficult to prosecute in that case. The coin is correct in all respects; it has exactly the
weight of gold, so what is false about it is that it was made outside the legal conditions.

                                                                                                     32

Why is it interesting to make fake gold coins in this sense, in the third sense? It means that the
rate is not the same, the rate for medals and the rate for coins. You see, you can therefore be a
counterfeiter while still being true. You create gold coins with the same weight as the authentic
coin, the same design; you are a forger precisely because you put the drawing on it. In other
words, you create a medal, nobody can forbid you from making a medal; it's legal. What is not
legal is that this medal has exactly the characteristics of the official piece, and you are playing on
the difference in rates between the medal and the official coin. So, there are three ways for there
to be a fake gold coin.

What does it mean, a piece of gold that would judge itself? It’s according to the affects it has.
Let's say the fake gold coin has silver affects. It is silver overlaid with a gold covering. It has
silver affects. The gold piece in proportion, inaccurate, has affects of gold, but which don't
complete most of it, you see? The complete piece of gold that has as much gold as the real piece
has affects of gold and yet it’s missing something.

Well, I would say there is a way in which each thing can be presented as judged by itself by
creating the self-test. What is it to create the self-test? Well, for example, it’s a sound. It’s not a
judgment. The potter has his clay vase, and he gives a tap. Or else the chemist puts a drop on the
gold coin, right? It’s a physicochemical test. Tell me what you are made of, tell me a little. This
is not a judgment; it is an experiment. Tell me a little what are you made up of, what your own
sound is. So, for example, to return to the example, I tap you there, what sound does it make
there? Oh, it's a funny sound, like a potter's vase, eh? So, we would see people who pass for
being very elegant or very moral. If we hate them, then, of course, we pinch them.

Parnet: So, you want to pinch me?

Deleuze: No, no, no! We pinch them, and we realize that, well, we say to ourselves, it's curious,
they make a funny noise, they are false, eh, they’re false. And that shows in what, someone
suddenly makes a gesture. Someone in a moralistic speech, someone betrays himself. That's
what’s so cool about judging yourself. It’s, eh, when you betray yourself. Ah well, we see
someone talking about pious, lofty things and then, suddenly, a boy or a girl passes by, he has a
funny glance. [Laughter] No, I'm choosing crude examples so that everyone can understand.
[Laughter] We say, ah, but what is this, what is this? He has this glance that suddenly is slightly
veiled; he has a long sneaky glance, we say, "oh, oh, and what is that? what is it? what does that
mean?" Or else Monsieur de Charlus in Proust, right, Monsieur de Charlus in Proust, all of a
sudden, has a vocal shift, and we say to ourselves: "hey, what, what’s wrong with him?"... That's
the physicochemical test.

So, this is not a moral judgment; moreover, we can even have surprises. A guy there who seems
normal (comme ça), who even plays at being little working class and who really is working class,
all that. Then, there is a vocal sound all of a sudden, and we say to ourselves, it is not that he
isn’t working class, but it’s that he has a tremendous soul; for him to say what he has just said, he
has to be something else as strong, or that he has to be a prodigious artist, even if he doesn't
know it, something like that, something that betrays someone. I imagine, I imagine that for
Spinoza, that's sort of what he's trying to tell us.

                                                                                                     33

You know, you see people exist, people’s motivations in their existence, well, there are certain
ways in which existence judges itself. It’s a bit like that as well in Nietzsche; I’m not saying it
comes down to that. When Nietzsche says, don't judge life, don't dare to judge life. He says it's
awful, who are all these guys who are judging life? What does that mean? By what right do you
dare to judge life? So, it's like Spinoza. They question morality because they challenge any
system of judgment; they challenge any court.

But, [Spinoza’s]7 complementary idea is a very different meaning of the word "judgment",
namely, if it is impossible to judge life, that’s because ultimately life does not stop judging itself,
and in a whole other sense of "judgment", namely, "you have the life you deserve, so don't
complain, never complain". Do not complain, never complain, because ultimately the affects you
have, whether they are unhappiness or joy, etc., you deserve them, not at all in the sense that you
have done everything necessary for you to have them, but that's not even it. But it’s in a cleverer
sense, a much subtler sense, namely: "the affects that you experience refer to and suppose an
immanent mode of existence". This is where the point of view of immanence is completely
preserved. It is an immanent mode of existence that is assumed by the affects that you
experience, and ultimately you always have the affects that you deserve by virtue of your mode
of existence.

So, in that sense, ah, okay, if you, for example, the tragic ones, the cohort of depressed people
I'm talking about, how do you want, it's not difficult, it's not difficult, what I’m saying is not
meant badly. You cannot be depressed in the true, clinical sense of the word, even if despite
yourself -- I mean despite you, because everything I am talking about, I know that it is not easy -
- if despite yourself, you haven’t attached a specific value to the values of the tragic and
depression and collapse. If you live in a mode for which the idea of collapse has absolutely no
meaning -- I’m not just saying no theoretical meaning, but no lived meaning -- you can
experience affects of unhappiness, as they say, you will not make a drama of it. You can't put a
load of anxiety on it.

And it’s never at the level of suffering, either physical or moral, that you have, that things are
decided. Things are decided in a mode of existence at the level of loads (charges) of anxiety that,
despite yourself, you place on one thing or another, and here Spinoza would be very, very, he
would be like everyone else, he knows them, these loads of anxiety. So, he tells himself that
wisdom about the modes of existence is for each person to manage to clarify vis-à-vis oneself
into what and onto what we put our loads of anxiety, and what our own vulnerable points are.

That’s kind of like the potter’s test. The load of anxiety is always there where I snap, where I
break, where I crack. The potter’s test is to look for points of crack-up, eh? If I don't know my
crack-up points... And what is the best way not to know, what is he denouncing in the judgment
and court system? It’s a propagation of unhappiness that’s created, the taste of unhappiness, the
taste of anguish, etc., which is presented to us as a basic value, and that, Spinoza thinks that it
belongs to every tribunal.

What he says there, the great Trinity, yes, the tyrant, the priest and what Spinoza calls the
"priest", it's very simple, he's "the man of anguish", it is the man who says "you are wrong, you
are a sinner, I will judge you". Just as Nietzsche much later will also call him, I am calling

                                                                                                       34

"priest" the one, the man of the judgment system, the man of the court, eh, the tyrant, the priest
and the man of misfortune, that is, the tyrant, the priest, the slave. For him, that’s what bad clay
or fake gold coins are.

So what he is talking about is this test, yes, it’s at the level: yes, you understand, eh, it’s not at all
that I am a judge, if I even see my best friend and suddenly, I do this to him, like this, to see how
he sounds, how he sounds, and I realize with dread that someone I had seen for twenty years,
whom I had thought I knew, well no, there is something there, something that I had completely
missed.

So, that can be a wonderful revelation, if it's beauty, if it's an abyss, do you realize? Do we tell
ourselves, ah, well then, anyway, it's always quite cheerful, quite fascinating, these moments? It's
the kind of self-betrayal, we keep betraying ourselves, right, for good or for ill. So that’s good; I
don't know if I answered everything, but anyway, I can't answer questions like that; they are too
difficult, the answer is in your heart.8

Comtesse: In The Twilight of the Gods, Nietzsche rightly denounces, concerning the problem of
judgment, what he calls, the, the, the error of freedom as the most infamous ideological trick of
power (pouvoir). And, he says this, power needs to make people believe in individual freedom in
order to make people believe that whether they have individual freedom or who believe it to be
possible, that individual people are responsible. They need, it needs people to be responsible so
that they feel guilty; it needs them to feel guilty in order to be able to operate both its judgment
of condemnation and its punishment.

Deleuze: That’s signed Spinoza; that's the point where Nietzsche really encounters Spinoza. That
is, in Spinoza, you find exactly the same criticism of "freedom" as subject to the same use. Tell
me, I'm very perplexed… [Deleuze responds to another student] Yes, right away, yes, yes, yes,
yes?

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: Okay, good. So, there's something rather perplexing. I expected to have finished this,
but I haven’t finished. Ah well, and I would like to move on…

Parnet: Us too…

Deleuze: … so, the time, the next session, I will do it there really, as a conclusion of conclusions,
and then, I will do that, I will speak a little about that [the Spinoza phrase in which he says that
all affection is an affection of essence] and about ontology, but, whatever happens, I have to
finish next time, whatever happens! [End of session] [2:35:50]

Notes

                                                                                                                     35

  See the successive review of the Spinozist theory of individuation, linked to the individual’s dimensions and to the
individual’s movements toward the second and third kinds of knowledge in the sessions on 3, 10, and 17 February
and 10 March 1981.
  The laughter is due to Deleuze’s attempt to distinguish two homophones, étang or pond, and étant or being, a term
introduced frequently in earlier sessions.
  La Dame aux camélias is an 1848 novel by Alexandre Dumas fils adapted in 1852 as a vaudeville play. The
students’ laughter comes, in all likelihood, from the incongruity of the topic under discussion and the example
drawn from the nineteenth-century French literary canon. As Deleuze insists in “L as in Literature” in Gilles
Deleuze, From A to Z, he takes very seriously literary works that some might characterize as being of secondary
importance within the canon.
  This small reference, omitted in the BNF recording, is furnished thanks to access to the recording produced by
Claire Parnet and Richard Pinhas for Gallimard editions, a double cd entitled Gilles Deleuze, Spinoza: Immortality
and Eternity (2001).
  The identity of “Lawrence”, from the Deleuzian perspective, is D.H. Lawrence in all likelihood, but there is also
T.E. Lawrence in whom Deleuze shows great interest, notably in a chapter of Essays Critical and Clinical.
Meanwhile, identifying the other author was rendered difficult by Deleuze’s pronunciation of this name. The Paris 8
transcriber of this section, Cécile Lathullère, rendered this as “Powice.” Fortunately, the transcription in Sur Spinoza
(ed. David Lapoujade, Paris: Minuit, 2024) has yielded the British author and philosopher, John Cowper Powys
(1872-1863).
  The following sentences in brackets are absent from the BNF recording and have been furnished thanks to the
alternate recording occurring at this session and published by Gallimard in the double CD (in section 8 of CD 2).
  Deleuze mistakenly says “Nietzsche”.
  Although I have limited notes on the Gallimard CDs editing to the augmented French transcription, I should note
that the Gallimard recording ends right here, rather than about a minute later following the final comments.