1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema: Classification of Signs and Time, 1982-1983

Lecture 16, 12 April 1983 (Cinema Course 37)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze (Paris 8), Fabienne Kabou (Part 1) and [transcriber not
indicated] (Part 2); new transcription prepared by Marc Haas; additional revisions to the
transcription and time stamp, Charles J. Stivale

Translation: Charles J. Stivale

Part 1

[A student is speaking to Deleuze]

Deleuze: What?

The student: [Inaudible comments]

Deleuze: Ah, why yes! Ah, yes! No, no, I remember, it was to know whether you, you yourself
remember, [Laughter] a question like that, really, because I’d like to start class lightly. I’d like
for us to have a very light session, very light, not harsh, [Laughter] in that way, a session for
musing [rêverie]. [Pause] I’d like to try to be very clear about this story of the sublime in Kant
because it’s really beautiful what he says. Anyway, you see, there’s no, there’s no question about
the point we’ve reached, which would let me gain some time? [Pause] No questions? Well, then,
we have to start, let’s get going. So, there we are, we need… The ideal would therefore be for
you to have maintained a recollection of our long classification of movement-images and signs.
[Pause]

There is one thing I’ve never said, because in my mind, I didn't think to say it, and then I told
myself that it goes without saying. When we relate the movement-image to cinema -- I feel the
need to say it now, you will understand why, because from now on, I will need it, I will need it
more -- when we relate the movement-image to cinema, that means, of course, that in the
cinematographic image, there are things or people who move. But it’s not through this that it’s
the movement-image. Strictly speaking, I would say it’s an image in movement; it’s already
enough to distinguish it from photography. So, the image which presents us with people or
moving objects will be called, in contrast to the photographic image, a cinematographic image,
that is, an image in movement. I place myself in the static shot situation with moving people, a
train, a gentleman. But why -- it's still my terminological concern, so you don't believe that, after
all, if you make up a word, or if you write it in a particular way, it will be there to look pretty --
when I say “movement-image” with a hyphen, either it doesn't make sense and it shouldn't have
been used, or else it implies something more, compared to the image in movement. [Pause]

And what more does that imply in relation to the image in movement? Immediately I think of the
basic Bergsonian statement, for all of Bergsonism. Bergson keeps telling us: well, after all, to

                                                                                                     2

understand movement in its most concrete character, one must manage, by an act of the mind
which he calls an intuition, to detach" or "extract" it from its moving body or vehicle. Our
natural perception -- and it’s here, it seems to me, that he is very strong -- he says: our natural
perception only grasps movement when attached to something that serves as a moving body or
vehicle for it, either object or subject. But more important than the idea of object or subject is the
idea of mobile body or vehicle. Well, he says, philosophy will only be a philosophy of movement
if it succeeds in extracting movement from what serves as its moving body or vehicle.

Well, that's interesting, but anyway, who does that? This is the cinematic image. Bergson doesn't
want it, and he doesn't want it because he doesn't know it, and he doesn't know it because he
can't know it. This is why he criticizes cinema for simply giving us an abstract image of
movement. But movement as separated from its moving body or its vehicle is not at all an
abstract image of movement; it is movement in its essence, in its concrete essence, or it is
movement as substance, as a real substance.

I’m saying, that's what the cinematographic image does. Under what conditions and when? Since
we’ve seen a first case of the cinematographic image, it is the image in movement, a fixed shot
with something moving in the shot. It's an image in movement, good, but you notice that the
movement is not detached from a moving body or a vehicle. It’s the movement of the train, it is
the movement of the character. Here, my current musing is: what is it, what is the movementimage that is not in the image in movement, and how does it arise in cinema? The easiest answer:
well, it arises with the camera’s movement. The camera, the camera, well okay, but the camera is
definitely a moving body; it's a vehicle. For example, it is on a rail, or it is carried on someone’s
back, or shoulder, etc. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yes, materially. But the camera’s movement is like
-- we saw it another year, last year – it could almost be called, and not at all in the sense of an
abstraction, but of a concrete reality, the general equivalent of any possible movement, even if, in
fact, there are movements that it cannot make; as long as it is on rails, these movements are
relatively limited, so then there’s the crane, then there’s the hand camera, on a man’s back,
there’s everything you want, on a man’s shoulder, good, a mobile camera, a liberated camera, the
liberated camera of [F.W.] Murnau, etc. Good.

So, I’m saying, understand, although the camera ... although the camera movement may on its
own be related to a mobile body or to a vehicle, on the other hand – which is the camera itself, in
movement – on the other hand, it’s in its relationship with movement that it traces -- and the
relationship of this movement with the other movements -- the movements of the image in
movement, there is something like a release. I mean, a movement emerges that is grasped
independently [Pause] of its own mobile body or vehicle. [Pause] It’s a step towards this capture
of pure movement, the camera’s mobility. [Pause] Why? Because it causes movement’s
transformation. The famous example of the liberated camera in Murnau, it gets off a bicycle;
Murnau puts it on a bicycle. He puts everything in an elevator -- it's "The Last Laugh" [1924] --
he puts everything on an elevator; the elevator descends, the camera films the hotel’s lobby
through the elevator’s windows, and, continuously, it emerges on a bicycle, a guy being on the
bicycle, and obviously, it crosses the lobby. The camera’s movement, in a way, connects two
movements with different mobile bodies: the elevator, the bicycle. It could show one of them and
hide the other; it will show the elevator’s movement, it will hide the bicycle’s movement, it
hardly matters. It tends, I’m saying, the camera’s movement tends to extract a pure movement

                                                                                                      3

from its varied mobile bodies and vehicles.1

Hence what struck me in a recent cinema project, hence what struck me greatly in [Wim]
Wenders’s films, namely this sort of equivalence that runs through Wenders's first films, the
camera movement as equaling a plane, plus a train, plus a boat, plus walking, plus an
automobile, etc. Notice in this equivalence, for example, in "Kings of the Road" [1976] or, even
more in "Alice in the Cities" [1974], in which the changes of means of transportation are as if
collected by the camera which is supposed to extract from all these means of transportation the
pure movement detached from the vehicle. So that's a means, it's a tendency, to be discerned.2
So, you will tell me, but nevertheless, there are still some people, that goes without saying, that
goes without saying, there are still some people on the screen, there remains…, etc. But what’s
important is that all these movements related to their mobile body and their vehicle are as if
taken up again, they are not canceled out, but are taken up again in a deeper movement which,
itself, detaches them or tends to detach them from the mobile body and from the vehicle. In this
way, the image in movement becomes a movement-image. Good. [Pause]

But isn't there another way to pass from the image in movement to the movement-image? Of
course, there is another way. Because, for a long time, and even now, if you look in a film at the
number of fixed shots and the number of mobile shots -- calling mobile shots the shots that have
camera movement -- well, you see first of all that in all so-called classic cinema, right, there is a
very great superiority of fixed shots. [Pause] When the camera became mobile, it invaded very
few images. It is notorious, for example, that in [D.W.] Griffith’s films, the camera movements
are all the more striking, and they are all the more splendid for being rare. They are reserved for
certain privileged moments. [Pause] In "Faust" [1926] by Murnau, the camera movements are
rare, [Pause] [13:00] and yet, as Noël Burch says very well, these are films that give us the
impression of a fundamental mobility. Yet they operate mostly by fixed shots. They hold back
their camera movements. Needless to say, what I’m saying also applies to many things in modern
cinema.3

But then, in that case, when it is not the camera movement that assures or realizes, that produces
this tendency to detach movement from the vehicle or from the mobile body, [Pause] what will
satisfy this function [Pause] in the case of fixed shots, where that movement remains irreducibly
attached to these mobile bodies and vehicles? So, it's very simple. What will guarantee this is,
what will guarantee and carry out this same tendency is the succession of shots, it’s the montage.
[Pause] There are two ways for cinema to tend to surpass – I say, “tend to surpass”, not at all
meaning that this is a failure – but, because if this tendency were completely realized, we would
fall into abstraction. If movement were completely detached from all mobile bodies and vehicles,
we would have a cinema that we could call, we would have images that we could call “abstract”.
That’s been done.

But here, at the level where I’m situating myself, it is not even a question of that; it is a question
of doubling the level on which movement relates to mobile bodies and vehicles, of doubling it at
the same time by the outline, the drawing of a movement, if needs be the same, insofar as it no
longer relates to its mobile body and its vehicle. And I’m saying that to produce this tendency to
extract pure movement, you have two means: the camera movement or the montage of fixed
shots. You can combine the two means with montage [Pause] at the level of movements, camera

                                                                                                       4

movements.

You understand, it’s in this sense that I can say: the cinematographic image is not only an image
in movement, but it is really movement-image. [Pause]4 This highlights the difference between
the cinematographic image and the photographic image. Why? Because, if I thus define the
cinematographic image as a tendency to extract -- I insist on tendency --, a tendency to extract
pure movement from its mobile bodies and its vehicles, [Pause] I would say that almost here, the
photo and cinema oppose each other quite fully. At which level? I have the feeling that even from
the most technical, technological point of view, one can -- and this is not at all a criticism -- liken
the photo to a kind of molding [moulage].

There is a text by [André] Bazin which seems very interesting to me -- I don't have it, but... – in
which Bazin says something like: the photo is a luminous mold, it's a luminous imprint
[empreinte], [Pause] provided you understand what a mold is.5 A mold, I mean -- otherwise it
would be too easy a criticism, a criticism of the photograph, but precisely I have no critical
intention when I say the photograph is a molding -- a mold, I mean, is not simply a form which
imposes itself on a material from the outside. What happens when a child goes to the beach? See,
in the old days -- these aren’t the kinds of games anymore -- these are old games that, then, used
molds. So, children, for example, made a mold in the shape of a shell, then we put sand in it,
some sand, and then that created the shell, right? There is a mold.

I’m saying, it is not simply the imposition of a form on a material. That would be a purely
extrinsic operation. The walls of the mold, that is, the external shape, in fact, lead to what? A
whole reorganization of the states of forces which one could call “the states of intermolecular
forces of matter”. And it leads all of these intermolecular forces of matter, in the specific case,
sand, leads them to a state of equilibrium. Once this state of equilibrium – it takes time – once
this state of equilibrium is reached, you can unmold. This idea is very simple. I’m saying, in this
sense, well, photography is a luminous mold, it's a mold of light. It is a molding of light. [Pause]

Whereas what is the cinematographic image? There is indeed a difference in nature between the
photo-image and the cinema-image. [Pause] This is a technical operation that has been very well
analyzed by some people, [Pause] and it’s something we encountered on a specific topic several
years ago, particularly about music when we were talking about music. It's modulation. What
really sets molding apart is modulation, I mean, what stands out in the sense of, at the same time,
being concerned with. And there is an author who has analyzed very well, technologically, the
difference between molding and modulation as two ends of the technological chain. It's Gilbert
Simondon.6

And7 he says, well you see, a modulation, a modulator, how is it different from a mold, to mold
or to modulate, especially since there are all sorts of transitions between molding and
modulating? Well, a modulation is, if you will, a variable and continuous mold. It's a variable
and continuous molding. That is, in the case of a mold, the conditions of equilibrium are reached
after a certain time. That needs to settle. So, there you have it, the first characteristic of the mold:
the conditions of equilibrium are reached after a certain time. By conditions of equilibrium, I
mean the state of the intermolecular forces of the material, in the molded material, what’s being
molded. A second characteristic: once they are reached, we can demold; that does not change

                                                                                                    5

anymore. It is the role of the instant, it’s done.

In modulation, it's just the opposite. In -- see, sense that once again, I’m considering pure
modulation -- I would say, in pure modulation, the conditions of equilibrium are reached in an
instant, [Pause] but at every instant also, they change. [Pause] You could just as well say that
demolding never happens, or that demolding is constant and permanent. [Pause] In other words,
Simondon says quite well: a modulation is variable and continuous, and temporal molding.
Modulation is a variable, temporal and continuous mold which itself modifies, the conditions of
equilibrium. That’s what a modulator is.

So here, I would say exactly, literally, if you’ve followed me, the cinematographic image is a
movement-image, or, what amounts to the same thing, a modulation of light, [Pause] while the
photographic image is a molding of light. [Pause] And in fact, a modulation of light, or [Pause]
the tendency to extract movement from its mobile bodies and its vehicles, is exactly the same
thing; it is the reverse and the front side of the same operation. [Pause] I could almost say, at the
extreme, to modulate light is [Pause] not to cease, so it’s to tend toward and not to cease
extracting the movement of its mobile body or its vehicle, and vice versa.

And this would be very valuable for us because it would make us come back to the double aspect
of the cinematographic image. [Pause] From the beginning, from the beginning of this year,
we’ve said, yes, [the image] is indissolubly movement-image and light-image. It’s the lightimage as a modulation of light; [Pause] it is the movement-image as an extraction of the
movement from its mobile bodies and its vehicles. [Pause] Well, but then, we return to the point
we’ve reached in our analysis. -- Are you okay, are you okay? Is this okay, nothing to…? –
[Pause] I’m saying, this restarts everything because, on this, we have at our disposal, we again
have at our disposal, I’m not going back over it, our whole series of types of movement-image.
Types of image-movement, there are all kinds, each with its signs; we’ve covered all that.

And so, we reached the following problem: well, precisely in the case of these movementimages, or of these light-images, [Pause] we are going to reach a new type of image that we’ll
have to call: “image of time”. And here, the questions rush in for us. [Pause] Why call them
“image of time” and not “time-image”? It’s always out of a need for terminological rigor. We
said, well yes, starting from, if we obtain an image of time, or images of time from movementimages, they are necessarily images of time. Why? Because they are obtained indirectly. They
are obtained indirectly; they are obtained by the composition of movement-images.

Hence a question returned immediately, and that we’ll hold back for later since this will be the
basis for the year-end, I assume: well, aren’t there other conditions through which we might
reach indirect time-image? I could call a direct image of time a “time-image”. But as much as I
apprehend time starting from and as a function of movement-images, I can only say: this is an
indirect image of time. This is an image of time that I obtain through the composition of
movement-images. And after all, that seemed to us to be a definition, one of the definitions of
montage in cinema among many others, or one aspect of montage, the composition of
movement-images such that an indirect image of time emerges. [Pause]

                                                                                                         6

And here we have exactly, this is so that you have the whole problem in mind. [Pause] So we
were in the process of adding to our classification of images and signs a new major category of
image. We had created the whole classification of movement-images and the corresponding
signs. We had obtained all sorts, all sorts of signs, I don't know, but anyway, it could multiply, so
30, 40, 50. We named them; all that was a lot of fun. [Laughter] And then, now, we’re telling
ourselves, well, we must add the indirect images of time, [Pause] the indirect images of time that
derive from the composition, that is, from the montage of movement-images. And then we'll
have to add, perhaps, direct images of time. [Pause] So, from here onward, whether these are
indirect images of time, or direct time-images, if they exist -- we don't even know yet if they
exist and if they can exist, direct time-images -- but assuming they exist, in any case, they will be
grouped under the general title of "chronosigns”. They will be chronosigns. [Pause]
And what we began before the vacation [session 15, March 22, 1983] was a first sort of indirect
image of time. Because after all, we didn’t say it because we had too many things to say; it seems
to me, well now the moment has come -- as we have a sort of pause, the before vacation and the
afterward -- well, it's obvious that, in any case, we had to expect two indirect images of time. We
had to expect two indirect images of time. Why was that? Because we have seen the front and
reverse sides of the movement-image; it’s the movement-image and it’s the light-image. [Pause]
On one hand, it is [Pause] -- let's also take a term here that we sometimes encounter in Bergson -
- on one hand, it is "mobility". I’m saying “Bergsonian term” because he defines it in a very
special way. For him, mobility is movement in its essence, that is, extracted from its mobile body
or vehicle, pure mobility. And the movement-image, on the one hand, is pure mobility, and
therefore, it refers to its movement-image aspect, and on the other hand, it is pure modulation.
[Pause] And, under this other aspect, inseparable from the first one, it refers to the reverse side of
the movement-image, or to the front side, it doesn't matter, the reverse side of the movementimage or the front side of the movement-image, it is the light-image. It’s mobility of movement.
Once again, mobility of movement means for us something precise -- it is not literature, here, it’s
not a way of speaking -- mobility of the movement means movement insofar as it is no longer
related, or that it is not only related, to its mobile body or vehicle. So, on one hand, I have
mobility of movement, and on the other hand, modulation of light.
In some ways, it's the same; in other ways, it's not. Why is that? Here again, I come back to it,
because we’d need, we’d have to take another year, when, [Pause] in the dream of a course that I
could do one day on "what is philosophy?" anyway, [Laughter] what would impress me the most
is what I've already told you a lot, that is, whatever it is..., I’m trying to say it the most concretely
possible, hence as flatly as possible, namely that philosophy obviously has no privilege in
relation to the true and the false, and has nothing to say about the true and the false, but that it
has something fundamental to say about constructing concepts. And so, what philosophy does is
to build concepts; it is, like that, like architects, they build houses, musicians, they build sounds,
etc. Well, the production of concepts is what philosophy is all about.

But, if that's what philosophy is, what interests me is these kinds of interests or tastes, [Pause]
which once again, means that, as well at the level, and so among philosophers, in philosophy,
there are, there are as in all the other arts, there are producers, or creators, there are spectators,

                                                                                                          7

and there are all the intermediaries between the two. The spectator in philosophy is the one who
says, "Oh, what a beautiful concept that is". [Laughter] A beautiful concept, yes. But what does it
mean, the one who says, "That's a beautiful concept"? Because there, the problem is the same for
the spectator and the creator. The spectator who tells himself about certain concepts, "what a
beautiful concept", that amounts to saying -- I am a Cartesian, for example, if they are concepts
from Descartes, [Pause] well -- he will be marked by Descartes. If you grant me, what goes
without saying is that philosophy has more urgent, higher and more important tasks than
searching for truth, and since precisely its highest and most important task is to create concepts,
with all the questions, obviously, that must arise: what is the point of this, why, why do this?
Why do this rather than something else? But the creation of concepts is as important as the
creation of colors and lines, as the creation of sound complexes, it’s as important, as beautiful, as
good.
And I always come back to this, there is a matter of taste. There's a matter of taste. What do you
want, when, when you say ...? I'm not going to tell someone, I assume, or no one’s going to tell
me: you're wrong in what you’re saying. That's why I can't stand objections, anyway; [Laughter]
this isn’t, it’s not possible, I'm not wrong in what I’m saying. At the same, while it's not possible,
what is possible is something much more awful, that I don't pose the right problems. Really,
that's awful. But once again, a problem, you have to risk a problem. You have to build these
problems. There is no, there is nothing…The answers, I understand that the answers can be true
or false, but the problems... [Pause] If someone tells me the year in which Descartes was born,
yes, I say, that’s true or false. And there is only one way to re-establish, in my opinion, there is
only one way to re-establish verification of knowledge in philosophy -- it wouldn't be difficult --
the day we join the continuous verification of knowledge, it is in the form of questions and
answers concerning philosophical concepts. Because here, this is frightening: at the level of the
philosophers themselves, right? It's the parade, really; it would consist… verifying knowledge in
philosophy would consist in saying: what is the a priori in Kant? What is, what does Kant call
transcendental, etc.? Solely creating definitions of concepts, but anyway.

When you feel, when you have a relationship with a philosopher that is favorable, or a
relationship with a philosopher that is unfavorable, and you happen to express it in the form of
"he's wrong", you feel that you are saying something shameful, after all. It is as if you were to
tell a mathematician: ah, you are wrong! You wouldn't dare say that to a mathematician because
he would smack you. [Laughter] On the other hand, what might happen? I saw, at one point, I
happened to read a mathematical journal. I remember some reviews of university theses by
[Henri] Poincaré. And Poincaré said about a mathematician's thesis -- so it's at a high level; a
mathematics thesis is at a very high level -- well, Poincaré said, in his judgement, speaking
summarily: without any interest. Without any interest. That's interesting, this judgment: without
any interest. Understand why this is interesting. Because a mathematician is not going to
reproach another mathematician for having made a mistake in his calculation or his proof. The
mathematician didn't make a mistake, or if he made a mistake, even that doesn't matter, right? If
he wrote 7 + 4 = 15, it doesn't matter, it really doesn't matter.
On the other hand, what happens is that people invent theorems that are without interest. It's not
that it's false. It's not that it's false, it's worse [Pause]: it doesn't make mathematical sense. It's

                                                                                                        8

true, it might be true, or it can be, why not, there's no necessity, it doesn't advance anything, it
doesn't advance anything, it doesn't advance anything. This is a much more obscure, much more
difficult field of thought. And it is true of all works of art; it is not true of sciences only. You will
have films, well yes, zero. What does “zero” mean? It has no interest, none, no interest. It's grabs
things from right and left, they’re gimmicks... yes, it makes a whole; this whole: zero, no
interest.

What does that mean, "it's without interest"? It's a funny thing. Or what does it mean, someone,
and what is this "me" who can say: ah this, that interests me. Not "me" in my personality; that
interests me. I mean, what is it that makes each of us have our preferred authors? So, it's this
taste that I would like to talk about one day. It is this taste that is one with the activity of creation;
it is this viewer’s taste that is one with the activity of creation, and that constitutes the deepest
affinity of the spectator and the creator, that consists in the character, for lack of a better word, I
say, the interesting or important character, either of a concept, or of a painting, or of an image.
What does it mean: this is interesting, and this is important, whereas it does not mean: is it true?
The category of importance... [Interruption of the recording]

... I can say, understand that philosophers, well, when we say that they’ve contradicted each
other, this is absolutely false. A philosopher has never contradicted another philosopher, any
more than a mathematician has contradicted another mathematician. It's much worse, [Pause] it's
much worse: [Pause] they haven’t stopped transforming their problems. They haven't stopped
transforming their problems. It's obvious that if you want to understand something, for example,
about the relationship between Bergson and Plato, well, it doesn’t happen by saying: one tells us
this and the other tells us the opposite. It's by asking ourselves, for example: in what way does
one and then the other pose the problem of movement? And it becomes evident precisely that the
way in which Bergson poses the problem of movement has no equivalent in Plato, or has only
very marginal equivalents, but that, on the other hand, certain problems in Plato’s works have no
equivalent in Bergson. What is this tension of problems, this tension of problematics?

So, well, that's a bit of what I want to talk about with my image story. I’m saying, movementimage and light-image, these are the front and reverse sides, they’re inseparable. And you won't
have movement without light and transformation of lights, and you won't have light without
movement. [Pause] And practically, that doesn't prevent that -- and this will make big differences
in images -- practically, you have people who are interested – I’m coming back to my topic of
importance and interest -- what they are interested in is above all light. They are children of light,
or children of the night. That's what interests them. What do you want to tell them at that level?
Do you want to tell them: "You're wrong"? "You should be interested in something else"? You
can always tell someone: "You should be interested in something else", but I don't see what right
you have. It's already quite wonderful that he's interested in something. [Laughter]

I’m saying, there are certain authors about whom it’s said: their main concern is light. It's true in
painting, it's true in cinema, it's true in philosophy. There are others for whom the problem of
light, well no, it doesn't mean anything to them. They say what, well... there are some people in
the cinema, there are some people for whom the real problem for them is movement. What does
that mean, concretely? This is a way to qualify my idea. I’m indeed saying: by right. If you
consider the image itself, any movement-image is light-image, any light-image is movement-

                                                                                                       9

image. I tried to show this in, at the very beginning of this year.8 I’ve just specified this; it means
pure mobility, and it means pure modulation. And mobility is a modulation, modulation is a
mobility. All right, fine, all that goes without saying. But that doesn't prevent there being authors
who are only interested in movement, finally, because it redistributes lights. For them, movement
is at a second power; what interests them is that movement makes light move. They will be
called Luminists; that will be their primary problem.
And then you have other authors for whom light is fundamentally subordinate to movement.
Light allows decompositions and compositions of movement. Light is one of the means by which
one can extract pure mobility from movement, that is, the movement of one's mobile body or of
one's vehicle. [Pause] Light is at the service of movement. [Pause] They can make great
discoveries in the domain of light, but it is precisely because, for them, light will only be at a
second power, that they will make discoveries of this type. I would say of this race of authors
that they are Mobilists. At the same time, we shouldn’t harden the categories too much. Of
course, of course, the Luminists are interested in movement; of course, the Mobilists are
interested in light, and yet it's a system completely… it's a very, very different system. And
furthermore, they will be able to converge towards common achievements by which we viewers
are dazzled, both by the light which emerges from it and carried away by the movement. And
that doesn't prevent these achievements from being analyzable, and perhaps analyzable in two
simultaneous ways, one in which it's movement that drives the light, the other in which it's light
that commands movement. And it will not be created in the same way depending on one case or
the other.

Hence, I’m saying, we had to expect two figures, two indirect images of time. [Pause] On the
one hand, it’s necessary to draw from movement-images an indirect image of time, [Pause] and
on the other hand, it’s necessary to draw from the light-image, from light-images, an indirect
image of time. And this won't be the same, this won't be the same. So, I will already have two
chronosigns, [Pause] a chronosign of the movement-image, a chronosign of the light-image.
[Pause] And why are they separable, even though they are very, very intertwined? Well, for one
simple reason. It is that movement-image, as its name suggests -- with its problem of mobility
and the extraction of movement from the mobile body or the vehicle -- must be understood as
extensive movement, movement in extension. [Pause] Time as an indirect image that emerges
from it, well, as we have seen, it’s a time under a double aspect. This is what we saw the last
time, just before the holidays, it’s time as the “interval” of movement; it corresponds to the part,
and it is time as the Whole of movement. [Pause]

So, my first image – you see that this gets complicated -- my first image of time -- time such as it
is extracted from movement and such as it is related to extensive movement -- has itself two
signs: the interval, the interval of extensive movement, the interval of movement, and the Whole
of movement, the Whole of movement. I will not return to this point. The Whole of movement
was, for example, what Descartes called the constancy of the quantity of movement in the
universe. [Pause] Long before him, and in quite a different way, this is what the Greeks called
the number, the great number of time… sorry, the great number of movement.

Okay, so I have a first indirect figure of time; let's call it – so, it is time obtained by composition
of movement-images -- we can call it, literally, "cinechrony", cinechrony. [Pause] Cinechrony is

                                                                                                    10

the figure of time as composed from and as a function of movement-images of extension,
movement-images of extension. I’m saying that this figure of time, as we have seen, has two
aspects: once again, time as interval which refers to the part of time… [Deleuze corrects himself]
which refers to the part of movement, time as the whole that refers to the Whole of movement.
Concretely, we have seen this, and I’m returning to the image at the point we reached, this timeimage, rather this image of time, this first image of time; it is the image of the bird, it is that of
the most beautiful of birds which is the bird of prey; it is the great circles of the soaring bird of
prey. That is time as Whole, and it is the wing beats of the fleeing bird. And the wing beat is the
interval of movement, just as the great circle which reveals the horizon of the world is the Whole
of time.

What is time as an interval? It’s the present. The present is the in-between-beats. The present is
the interval. And I can never say “the present” without adding the “variable present”. My present
is eminently variable. No present is the same as another present. No beat happens the same way.
So, there are, there are, there are, there are statistical balances: I can say, my present is the
interval between an exhale and an inhale. It’s the interval between a contraction and a dilation. I
will have defined my present by the pulmonary interval in one case; I will have defined my
present by the cardiac interval in other cases. But already, it’s as much to say that I am straddling
multiple variable presents. And it is according to my occupations that I refer to a particular
present as a way to define my present, but I am a component of a multiplicity of virtual presents.

It's very nice to know that. It's very nice, and then obviously, first off, when they come apart,
what is it that… when they come apart, when they burst, when the heart goes one way, the lungs
another, and the feet still elsewhere, this is what is called a panic situation, when there is no
longer a common measure between the different variable presents that compose me. There has to
be some kind of common measure, otherwise then, otherwise my heart goes one way when my
feet go the other, right? Good. I’m saying, time as an interval is the variable present. There we
have the first figure of time, or rather, there we have the first sign of time.

The second is the Whole, time as the Whole of movement, and time as the Whole of movement,
what is it? This time, it is no longer the variable present, it is the immensity of the past and the
future insofar as they are supposed to constitute a circle or a constant. Example: Descartes's
invariant, MV. A completely different example: the Great Year in certain forms of ancient
thought, which represents the Whole of time, that is, the moment when all the planets find the
same respective position. Are you following me?

So, I have two signs of time: the variable present and the immensity of the future and the past.
Notice that it gets complicated because the vastness of the past and the future, ultimately, has no
need of the present. Variable presents have no need for past and future. These are notions that are
completely heterogeneous, which come from: the presents measure intervals of movement.
[Pause] The line of the future and the past does something completely different; it measures the
Whole of a movement or, in short, the Whole of movement in general. Good.

So, I’m saying, the first indirect image of time, the image I called cinechrony, that is, the image
of time extracted from movement-images, it presents two signs to me: "the interval" and "the
immense”. I’m no longer using "immense", I’m using it for convenience, but I’m giving it a very

                                                                                                     11

concrete meaning, since what I’m calling "the immense" is the immensity of the future and the
past. So, the interval and the immense are the two signs of time insofar as it relates to the
movement-image. [Pause]

But, as we have just seen, we must expect another, another image, another indirect image of
time, this time in relation to the other aspect of the movement-image. I could start another graph
again. Here, we’ve restarted, we’ve restarted a graph that will be very, very, no, not complicated,
very simple. I could create it, but it's not worth it; you create it in your head. That if the reverse
side is the light-image, we have seen that, in this sense, it was something other than this reverse
side, it was not the same thing as..., that there was an order of importance, which you could
sometimes, well yes, you can turn over, it's an image that you can turn over. If it's light that
interests you, well, you turn it over, you place movement upside down. If it’s movement that
interests you, you turn it over, the light is underneath.

And now then, I’m saying, suppose it's light that we're interested in. We therefore grasp our
movement-image no longer as movement-image, but as modulation-image, light-image. [Pause]
Well, light-images will also come out through montage, that is, through composition, an indirect
image of time. [Pause] They won't be the same, it won't have the same signs, and for a very
simple reason. What I could say: light is a movement. Okay, but this is not a case of movement.
Why? I said, it's like the front and reverse sides. It is like the front and reverse sides, one of them
being extensive movement, light being intensive moment, [Pause] it’s intensity par excellence.
Would it be possible to demonstrate or show that all intensities arise from light? [Pause] Without
a doubt. Demonstrate, in what sense? Could we demonstrate it physically? Maybe, right, that, I
don't know, maybe, but why not? There are many things that would go in that direction. Can we
show it in another way? I would say that all of Romanticism was the attempt, but the entirely
successful attempt, to show from what point of view all intensities flowed from light. Good.

The movement-image was understood from movement in extension, extensive movement, that is,
from a movement that is defined by displacement in space. The light-image can equally be
defined as movement, but as intensive movement. It is to be expected that intensive movement
has a completely different nature than the extensive movement: in what sense? Well, we already
see it right away, the intensive movement, it has degrees, while extensive movement has parts.
Good. A degree is not a part. [Pause] So, I can say: the second figure of time, the second indirect
image of time, is the one that I draw or that I can draw through composition – but obviously it
won't be the same composition – that I can draw through composition of light-images, that is,
modulation-images, that is, intensive movement-images.

And there, it would be obviously, solely by symmetry -- it's not required, not required -- that we
also find two signs of this second image of time. This second image of time, well, fine, it is time
as I conclude it from compositions of light. A time such as I conclude it from compositions of
light, what is that? What is that... I could tell what the parts were, the parts of movement, from
the point of view of extension. I said it earlier: the parts of movement from the point of view of
extension are time as interval. This is the interval. This is the interval of movement. See, there's
something clever here, it's not funny, but there’s something clever all the same. I am wary since
obviously I cannot define a part of movement as part of a space traversed. Above all, I must
avoid it, because there, you could make an objection to me, and you would be right. You would

                                                                                                       12

say to me, what you’re saying is stupid, it's stupid. [Pause] Ten meters, for example, is not a part
of movement, it is a part of space traversed by a mobile body. Also, I’m saying, there are parts of
movement, but I am careful not to identify parts of movement with parts of space traversed. This
is why I said: the parts of movement are time as interval, [Pause] namely the part of the
movement of a bird, of a particular bird, it’s the interval between two wing beats. [Pause]

So here… Well, for the intensive movement, that is, for light, I will have to find it as well. And I
was saying, there is no part there, there are degrees, [Pause] yes, and the intensive movement
will go through degrees. Oh, it's going to go through degrees, but then... let's just let it go here.
We must try to move forward; to try to move forward, you have to muse, you have to... It's going
to go through degrees, but going through degrees, what is that? It has a name, it is descending
and ascending, descending and ascending. I'm not saying that intensity is linked, or is reduced to
that, but that's it above all: intensity is something that rises and falls. Hey, but you will tell me, it
occurs in extension, rising and falling. It's possible, but it's not, it's not so with the extension...
never would falling and rising have been isolated, isolable. It comes from intensity, falling and
rising. Maybe; that’s what I think anyway. Fine.

On the other hand, what belongs to the extension as such is making circles [Pause] and arranging
intervals. Amazing, that's pure extension. Descending and ascending, passing through degrees; to
descend and to ascend is to pass through degrees. That’s it, the origin of descending and
ascending. It really is something entirely different. And feel that it's a whole different time that
we're going to enter. And the degrees of light… and in fact, I’m coming back to…, light, it falls,
and once again, what does it mean, to fall? That doesn't mean it's falling apart; it remains in
itself. But that means that the ray of light comes out of it in a certain way: it falls. And light rises
back up, right, all that’s fine... [Interruption of the recording]9

… What are these degrees of light? We can call them -- here, it's just a hypothesis, because that
would, that would bring us back to things that we saw last year or two years ago, I no longer
know; for those who were here, it would make it possible to make links with last year, I believe -
- degrees of light, we can call them, even if it means justifying it only later, degrees of light, we
can call them call them "colors".10 Colors would be degrees of light, that is, colors would be
intensities of light. Can that be said? Well, in what sense? If it's true, in any case, that would give
me a name, a word, one more word to designate this new image of time. I would say that the
image of time which corresponds to intensive movement or to light, this time is no longer a
cinechrony, as earlier, but this image of time is a “chromochrony”, a chromochrony. I'm happy
because this is the title of a great work by [Olivier] Messiaen.11 So, fine. [Pause] And
chromochrony, that is, the figure of time in relation to intensive movement, in relation to the
light-image, well, it would itself have signs; what would these signs be? Let's try to move
forward a bit, ok? These are not the same ones, obviously, as earlier. Earlier it was the interval
and the Whole.

Let us take any intensive quantity whatever. In any case, it falls. What do I mean by "it falls"?
Do I mean it disappears? No. To fall is its appearing [apparaître]. So, let's try to say, more and
more, as one can, it doesn't need to fall in order to fall. I mean, it falls onto you, it’s not the one
falling. It can fall, it's both, it's both. An intensity can always fall. You’ll tell me, a movement in
the extensive can always stop. Well, yes, okay, but it's not the same thing at all. In fact, when I

                                                                                                       13

say, “an extensive movement can always stop”, that means, it can always lead into an interval,
and there’d be no resumption afterwards. That's its way of stopping. [Pause] But when I say: an
extensive movement falls, and can always fall, well there, I have no notion of interval for the
moment.

Furthermore, I have the impression that I will never have one. The interval belongs completely to
the extensive movement. If I maintain my terminological rigor firmly, something else will be
needed. Between two degrees, I couldn't speak of an interval. When can I speak interval between
two degrees? The answer is well-known: when I’ve substituted extensive quantities for intensive
quantities that allow them to be measured. Namely, when I’ve substituted for heat the rise of the
column of mercury; with the rise of the column of mercury which is an extensive movement,
there I can say: there is an interval between two degrees. But insofar as being an intensive
quantity, the notion of interval is completely unjustifiable. So, what can I do, what does that
mean? I’m saying: the intensive quantity can always fall by itself, "fall" meaning “reach zero”.
So, it has a relation toward zero. We already have something very important: it has a relation
toward zero which is consubstantial with it.

Any intensive quantity is a function of zero. The extensive movement, as we have seen, was
related, had a reference. I mean, you'll be doing philosophy if you don't stop twitching; you have
to, you have to wade through these kinds of evidence, of, of platitudes, right? I’m saying, the
extensive movement is not in an essential relation with a zero. If you think of extensive
movement, you tell yourself: it must have a unit. The extensive relation is in relation with the
unit, [Pause] or, what comes to the same thing, with something able to be used as a unit. And this
is very different. The intensive movement, in its essence, in its intimacy, is in a relation with
zero. Well, it's its possibility of falling toward zero. And in fact, any intensity can drop to zero.
But it doesn't need to fall to zero to be an intensity, that is, to drop on top of us.

I would even say, falling toward zero is the vulgarity of intensity. It's the vulgarity of intensity,
that is, it's the easiest way, for it – I’m imagining intensity as living -- I would say, it's the easiest
way for it to make us feel something of its essence. [Pause] It's falling toward zero because
there, when it falls toward zero, it becomes glaring that as an intensity it was concerned with
zero. But in its nobler essence, that is, in its intimate essence, it does not need to fall toward zero
in order to be concerned with zero; it falls on us. It doesn't need to fall itself. The light falls down
on us, it does not stop, it does not reach zero for that; it keeps falling on us. And that's the
intensity; it won't stop falling on us. And it is you who will plead for mercy, that is, it’s each one
of us who will plead for mercy.

Perhaps extensive movement will not stop composing units. And in fact, the parts of movement,
what are the parts of extensive movement? You have movements -- well, I'll take the simplest
one -- you have so-called linear movements, so-called circular movements, and it doesn't stop, it
doesn't stop being composed. Looking at a spinning wheel, a spinning wheel, it's a composition
of movement, okay. The movement does not cease being composed, and the intensities do not
stop falling, falling down on you. So, fine. But it’s already in this that they have a relation with
zero. Why? Because what is it that defines an intensity? In what way is it a quantity? Well, it’s a
quantity because, like any quantity, it’s the unit of a multiplicity, the unit of a plurality. [Pause]
In the case of extension, it's very simple; in the case of extensive movement, a unit of plurality,

                                                                                                      14

it's very simple: plurality is the successive parts, the parts, and the unit is gathering into one.
[Pause]

But in intensive movement? [Pause] That's very odd. Kant tells us quite well: it is a unit [Pause]
whose plurality is apprehended in the instant. Perhaps you notice, this is the introduction for the
first time, well, of this word “instant”. I’m saying: you notice, because we feel that it will be
extremely useful to us, “instant” is something concerning time. It is not at all the same as the
present. We can say that we vaguely defined the present earlier, but we had nothing to say about
the instant. The instant will perhaps fundamentally belong to our second figure of time.

So, we’ll certainly hold on to that. So, it’s a unit whose plurality is apprehended in the instant.
How? In the form of its distance to zero, distance to zero. Why distance? The distance to zero
fundamentally belongs to intensity. In what sense? In the sense that intensive distance is opposed
to, or is distinguished from, extensive magnitude. [Pause] How is that distinguished? All
distances are indivisible. “All distances are indivisible”, what does that mean? That means,
“thirty degrees of heat” is defined by its distance from zero. [Pause] “Fifteen degrees of heat” is
defined by its distance from zero. But thirty degrees of heat was never fifteen plus fifteen.
Intensive quantities are not the product of an addition of parts. [Pause] As the other said, you
won't create heat by adding snowballs.12

Distances are indivisible. I mean, the distance, therefore the intensities. And I am in the process
of defining intensity through two aspects: its degree, that is, its unit apprehended in the instant,
[Pause] its plurality is defined as an indivisible distance from zero. Well, all intensities are
indivisible distances according to their degree, are indivisible distances to zero, with respect to
zero. But that doesn't prevent thirty degrees from being more than fifteen degrees. Thirty degrees
is not fifteen degrees plus fifteen degrees, but thirty degrees is more than fifteen degrees. Well,
fine. So, I can introduce pluses and minuses. Yes, I can introduce pluses and minuses provided
that I justify it, provided that it exists in another way than in extensive quantity. And in fact, I can
say that one distance is greater than another, [Pause] but I cannot say by how much. You will tell
me, but yes you can, thirty degrees is two times fifteen. You’re answering yourself in advance:
but no, that's not what it is. What is double is the rise of the column of mercury which itself is
extension.

But then, if you cannot, if you cannot add intensities, distances, if you cannot add distances
which are indivisible, what can you do? You can order them. Ordering is not the same as
measuring; these are two different concepts. You order differences or distances, whereas for
extensive movement, you juxtapose parts. Juxtaposing parts and ordering differences or distances
are not the same. I would say that intensity is the set of ordered differences or ordered distances,
calling distance, or difference, the relation of any intensive degree whatever with zero. [Pause]

Don’t I have two aspects of time? All that, that’s it, we’re acting a bit as… [Interruption of the
recording]

… I have just found something like the two signs of this second image of time, this time which
responds to intensive movement, or this time which responds to light, this time which responds
to light. You remember that for extensive movement, we had time as a Whole, and time as an

                                                                                                   15

interval. Time as Whole was the immense, that is, the immensity of the future and the past, and
time as interval was the present. And now, I have time as "order" or as "power" [puissance]. I
don't know, I see advantages in both words. So, that’s annoying, anyhow, but finally, for the
moment, I see that, time as order or as power.

What would I call the order or the power of time? That's quite different from time as Whole,
right? The order and power of time is the set of distances and differences as ordinates. Time is
what orders distances. My heart is stirred because I only say this on the condition that you see no
objection to be made to it. I see some of you who are on the brink of a kind of sleep, but
invincible. If you feel exhausted, you tell me, right, and then we’ll stop for a bit, ok? [Pause] So.
I’m concluding this point.

Time as order; so there we find there’s to be an order of time which is not at all the same as the
Whole of time. We will imagine battles between all these aspects of time. After all, this must
animate mythology. When intervals of time, which are small gods, very small gods, tiny gods,
intervals of time, the interval-god, it's…, the Greeks were very familiar with this, they called it
“a demon”. The interval was a demon. This was good, it was a great idea. Why? See, because the
interval is demonic, because for the Greeks, the gods had kingdoms, they had kingdoms, it was...
They were always gods of the limit. [Pause] It was the limit that was divine, and the demon is
what always crosses the limit. It’s what jumps. The demon, by definition, is the jump. In
Oedipus, there is a sentence which is, which is often very badly translated, because it’s translated
literally – dead languages can only be translated literally – it is Oedipus who says, invoking fate:
“Which demon, which demon, which demon jumped the longest jump?" “Which demon jumped
the longest jump?" Everything gets justified because what jumps is always the demon. And there,
Oedipus finds that the leap was a bit strong. The jump that caused him to cross the limits was a
bit strong. Which demon jumped the longest jump? So, if you don't think about this relationship
between the demon, the interval, the leap, obviously the sentence is obscure, it's even
unintelligible. Good, but anyway.

So, I was saying, we can… the interval can very well rebel; it's demons who come to offend the
gods. They will rebel against the Whole, the Whole of time. There is going to be the struggle of
the Whole of time and the intervals of time. The variable presents go to war. Why are they going
to war? Because they refuse to be parts of the Whole of time. Okay, so all of that, fine. What
does it matter, when the variable presents rebel? So suddenly, even if it means showing a vast
culture, we jump from Sophocles to Shakespeare. What does Hamlet mean when he says: "time
is out of joint", "time is out of joint"? Perhaps when the variable presents rebel against the Whole
of time, then time gets out of join, that is, the immensity of the future and past no longer makes a
loop, no longer makes a circle, good, but anyway.13

So, here we are, then, with... Well, yes, so I am going to withdraw the word "power", and yet I
need it, because all of this should be said to be powers of time: the first power of time, as we
have seen, would be the interval; the second power of time would be the Whole of time; what is
the third power of time? Well, that's the one we're talking about right now, in relation to intensive
time. Well, I’m saying, it is the order of time, that is, the order of all distances, the order of all
intensive differences, time as order, it orders distances. It would be like a kind of... it was not
endowed before, a kind of depth of time, a depth of time in which all distances are ordered

                                                                                                     16

toward zero. And what is this zero? That would really be the abyss of time, this zero. In fact, the
image of depth would have to be imposed on us since time would have to plunge into an abyss
which is precisely [zero], and which has zero as its sign. Good, but then the order of time would
then be something very different from the Whole of time. [Pause] And the second sign of the
intensive image of time, as we have seen, is that in its distance toward zero, all intensity is
apprehended in "the instant", [Pause] and the instant would be precisely that aspect of time under
which an intensity is intensity.

As a result, my two aspects of intensive time would be: the order of time, which would therefore
be like the third power, and the instant which would be the fourth power. I will have four signs of
the time, for the moment, for two figures. What is this instant then? [Pause] This instant would
be the capture of intensive quantity, of any intensive quantity as a unit, whereas distance would
be the capture of indecomposable plurality, that is, of its relation to zero. Good, but you see that
they are two completely different figures, and yet they are both sublime, yet they are both
sublime, and both, I would say, concern as closely as possible, that is, what affects us most
deeply, otherwise they would not affect us, they concern our soul. Yet at first glance, that does
not concern our soul since extensive movement concerns the world, concerns space. Intensity, if
it is true that it has its source in light, well yes, but we know well that our soul has a very close
relationship with the world and that [intensity] has a very close relationship with light. It would
still be necessary to show how that concerns our soul.

So, fine. And I’m saying, in both cases, there is something sublime, and finally, Kant can be our
intermediary [relai]. Because, when I spoke of the sublime in Kant, I only spoke about half of it,
and is it by chance that Kant distinguishes two forms of the sublime, and that he says, there is a
sublime – he says, in his language, in his very rigorous terminology – he tells us: there is a
mathematical sublime and there is a dynamic sublime? [Pause] And he adds: the simplest figure,
the figure of the mathematical sublime, is the immense -- all that suits us greatly [Pause] -- and
the simplest figure of the dynamic sublime is the deformed or formless. That suits us greatly.
[Pause] Why?14

There is a very common expression in physics in the 17th and the 16th century, and it is
deformedly deformed speed. Deformedly deformed speed refers to and is opposed to uniformly
accelerated movement, which is a very simple case. On the other hand, speed is the intensive
quantity of the extensive movement. Speed is, [Deleuze coughs] it’s literally a distance, in the
sense that I have just given to distance, it’s a difference. It is an intensive notion, therefore, the
deformed. The dynamic sublime is the deformed or the formless.

And he tells us, an example of the mathematical sublime: “the starry vault of the sky” – and
again, not just any conditions; he will state the conditions, since he says everything – “the starry
vault of heaven”.15 You are the night, you raise... "and trembling, I raised the palm of my body..."
-- it's a verse, it's a verse that suddenly I remember -- "and trembling, I raised trembling the palm
of my body”, but I don't know the rest, otherwise I would have recited it all to you. [Laughter]
It's a very beautiful verse, well, I find it very beautiful.16 Well, you raise the palm of your body
trembling, there, under “the starry vault of the sky”. Either you are denatured or else you are
invaded by the feeling of the sublime, but it’s a mathematical sublime. Either you are facing the
sea, facing the calm sea which is limited only by the horizon, and you experience the feeling of

                                                                                                       17

the mathematical sublime. Right? Good.

But, but... -- [Deleuze looks in his text] because here, I don't want to, I can't substitute for the text
which is so convincing -- but, any other case, and there you really feel that it isn't the same case.
[Pause] “You find yourself facing formless mountainous masses, piled on top of each other in
savage disorder”, [Pause] or else you find yourself facing -- we will see why -- facing, "a dark
raging sea, or else in the storm."17 It is no longer the starry celestial vault; it is the darkness from
which a terrifying flash emerges. There you are, the sea in fury, the mountain in avalanche, the
lightning in the dark sky. There you also experience the sublime, but you are not confused; there
you are not mistaken, and you tell yourself: ah, that is a sublime dynamic. Earlier, you were
saying: I'm fully within the mathematical sublime, good. What differences are there? Here, I’m
making a long parenthesis which is uniquely on Kant. We are going to rest because this will
provide us with a lot.

Well, the dynamic sublime, here we have the story of the dynamic sublime. Nature is unleashed,
[Pause] yeah, it's catastrophe, nature as catastrophe, flood, fire, ocean raging, all that,
catastrophe. Nature is unleashed, and what do you feel? That you are nothing, Kant says, that
you are nothing. I, man, I am nothing. In other words, it's too strong for me. It's too strong for
me. I mean, it’s very simple. -- Personally, I find these pages from Kant prodigious because they
have such simplicity, and it swells, you understand, it's really... in this respect, only music gives
these, gives the same joys, the simplicity of a theme, for example, the simplicity of a musical
theme, a very small theme, here, the simplicity of a motif and the way in which this motif will
swell, will swell, will swell, and will offer something extraordinarily complex, an extraordinarily
complex construction. In philosophy, you have exactly that. –

So, I find myself in this situation, the mountain, the avalanche, all that, the storm on a glacier,
right, the storm on a glacier, and you feel that you are nothing. There are forces, there are
unleashed forces, and yours are nothing compared to them. In other words, that falls upon you; it
is not, it is not force, it is not intensity that you see that falls toward zero. It falls upon you, it
reduces you to zero. It doesn't need to reach zero, since you are what it’s reducing to zero. It's too
strong for me. So, you are nothing. [Pause] Hence a kind of terror. Who are you? You, a human,
insofar as you are captured in all your sensible faculties. Also, you fear for your life, you tremble
for your days. Good.

But, but, but, but, at the same time, Kant says – his outline is very simple, and how beautiful it is
-- Kant says, at the same time – we'll see under what conditions, not under just any conditions –
at the same time that you feel your own strength reduced to zero by the enormity of the force in
whose presence you are, you feel being born in you, or awakening, or taking action, a spiritual
faculty which itself dominates nature, a spiritual faculty which dominates nature and which tells
you – it is not you who says it – and which says within you: "that does my human life matter?” I
mean, the sublime, it's made of all that, and if you tear off a piece, what does my human life
matter? What does my human life matter? That is, I am nothing, I am nothing vis-à-vis nature,
from the point of view of my sensible faculties, but nature in fury, I dominate you through my
spiritual faculties. You can kill me; what does my death matter? And the raging ocean and the
storm must awaken in you that spiritual faculty, from which, at the moment when you are
reduced to zero by the forces of nature, you rise above nature in the form: my life has no

                                                                                                    18

importance.

You don't seem convinced. [Laughter] Otherwise, I mean, there's no problem, otherwise you
don't have the feeling of the sublime. See what Kant means: the feeling of "dynamic sublime" is
made up of these two things: the way in which, facing an unleashed nature, you discover yourself
as being zero from the point of view of your physical faculties, but where, at the same time, a
faculty of the spirit awakens in you which makes you think about nature. And insofar as you
think of nature, you think of nature, you think of it based on a spiritual faculty, therefore
suprasensible, which makes you superior to this nature and which makes you say: “what does my
life matter?”, which makes you say, "It's God's will." Or, because Kant is very complicated,
which perhaps makes you speak blasphemies, because in a strange text, Kant says: despair is also
sublime when it is a rebellious despair; despair is also sublime when it's a rebellious despair,
which means, literally, if I understand correctly, when it's not a despair out of fear, "ooh there,
I'm going to die", but when it is a despair of revolt, that is, “God, I spit on you”, etc. In any case,
this is a faculty of the mind through which you think of nature and through which you present
yourself as superior to the unleashed forces, in relation to which at the same time you are nothing
from the point of view of your sensible faculties.

So obviously, Kant has, we could... Me, I think he does it on purpose because he has a lot of
humor. We wouldn't notice it, in his texts, we wouldn't notice it, but when you look closely... No,
there is a moment when obviously he’s laughing. He says [Deleuze laughs], for my story to be
sublime... it amounts to saying: for my story of the dynamic sublime to work, what is needed?
Well, you have to be sheltered, [Laughter] and so, he finds it quite funny, and he will show, so he
will make a theory of the need to be sheltered. And so, we can see it very clearly, like that, he
shouldn't have gone out when there was a storm. [Laughter] And it's so beautiful, [Pause] and
why? We must first understand why it is necessary. If I'm on the raging ocean, on my little boat,
well, I can't follow this course of the dynamic sublime because I'm so scared -- Kant says it's
normal -- I'm so scared, that only one thing counts, namely the feeling that I can do nothing such
that the whole process, the whole process of the dynamic sublime is cut off. I find myself facing
forces of nature, and the feeling that as a creature endowed with sensible faculties, I can do
nothing. And if there were only that, there would be no sublime. So, if I am not sheltered, I
cannot experience the sublime.

In fact, let's think about it. Let's be even more Kantian than Kant because, in my opinion, here
he’s being deliberately provocative. I can, even when I am in danger, I can achieve the dynamic
sublime. I mean, not me, but there are people who have not ceased, in full danger, to reach for
the dynamic sublime. [Pause] Yeah, that, I guess there are people, in catastrophes, who pretty
much take this Kantian journey, and they're caught up in the catastrophe, the feeling that they're
nothing, that their sensible forces are reduced to nothingness, are reduced to zero, since if
intensity does not get reduced to zero, it reduces you to zero. Fortunately, it does not cease, you
do not cease being reborn. And that's the instant, that's what the fundamental relationship with
the instant is. And that's going to result in it providing a very particular time, intensity. You no
longer know where you are within an intensity, that is, you are reduced to zero, always. But
anyway, good, so you are reduced to zero in your sensible faculties, but at the same time, you
feel a suprasensible faculty awakening within you, a spiritual faculty through which you are
superior to nature.

                                                                                                  19

So, you see, at the same time, nature is superior to you in its unleashing and reduces you to zero
as being endowed with sensible faculties, but awakens in you a spiritual faculty, a suprasensible
faculty through which you think of nature, and you say: “what does it matter, I’m standing up to
you, because I am spirit”. Good, well, how many commanders have died at sea [Laughter]
asserting that they have spiritual power? Not only in Victor Hugo,18 but in… there are some
admirable ones, Melville’s commanders, there are strange commanders in Melville. Captain
Ahab, Captain Ahab, is he sublime? Obviously, Captain Ahab is sublime, including, including in
his revolted despair, since he is fundamentally revolted, since he competes with God. Alright, so
every… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]

And that doesn't prevent it obviously from being easier to follow... I would say that it's not
impossible, when you're in danger, to follow the path of the dynamic sublime. We introduce this
miniscule correction, which does not authorize us to say: Kant was mistaken. We are saying,
Kant is enjoying himself here. For what pleases me greatly is his phrase… See, when we
discover ourselves as a spiritual faculty, superior to nature itself, [Pause] he can say that we hold
ourselves in esteem -- that's his way of speaking – we hold ourselves in esteem, not at all an
egotistical esteem, but esteem insofar as being spiritual. We discover in ourselves the spiritual
faculty, we hold ourselves in esteem. And here is the text: “This self-estimation loses nothing
from the fact that we must find ourselves safe in order to feel this exciting liking” – he just
explained that one had to remain on the shore to admire the ocean’s fury, and that at that
moment, we feel ourselves born as a spiritual being, superior to nature – “This self-estimation
loses nothing from the fact that we must find ourselves safe in order to feel this exciting liking,
since the danger is not genuine” – in fact, when I am on the shore and I am certain there’s no
boat, otherwise I feel pity, compassion, if I am certain there’s no one in danger, the fact that the
danger is not taken as genuine, I’m not taking the danger as genuine, there’s no one, and I am
well sheltered there, under my rock, everything is fine – “since the danger is not genuine does
not imply, whatever it might seem, does not imply that what there is of the sublime in our
spiritual faculty is not genuine.”19 That’s beautiful. Of course, I don't take danger seriously; I am
safely sheltered. That does not prevent the fact that, through the intermediary of unleashed nature
and the spectacle of unleashed nature, a spiritual faculty has awakened in me which makes me
think of nature and which I take seriously.

Which allows Kant to say: but, you know, what is sublime is never nature, and that’s his great
conclusion. What is sublime is necessarily the soul because nature is only the occasional object,
it is only the occasion [Pause] under which the feeling of the sublime awakens in us. But the true
object of the feeling of the sublime is the spiritual faculty which awakens in us. Therefore, nature
has only the appearance of the sublime, but the essence of the sublime is the spiritual faculty
which awakens in us on the occasion of the natural appearance. [Pause]

So, about this, you see, I’m insisting, I would say that the sublime dynamic is made up of the
common feeling of three powers. Three powers intervene: the power of nature in the formless or
the deformed; [Pause] the impotence of my being as a physical being, that is, I am reduced to
zero; the power of my spiritual being which rises above nature as formless. [Pause] There we
are, these are the three powers-impotencies, and compared to my power as a spiritual being, the
power of nature was nothing, is nothing anymore. What does it matter if I die? The power of
nature is now nothing. But compared to nature, my power as a physical being is now nothing.

                                                                                                    20

You still have the theme of distance toward zero and of an order of time, of a power of time
which marks, on the one hand, the infinite distance that there is between the force of nature and
your physical being, and which marks, on the other hand, the infinite distance that there is
between your faculty as a spiritual being and nature itself. In other words, this is a struggle
between nature and spirit. Well, why draw such a boring conclusion? Obviously because we will
need it later, the idea of a fundamental struggle as it is expressed in the dynamic sublime.

And, if you agree to go back a little bit to the mathematical sublime as we saw it the last time,
well, you may remember, we can clearly see that, in a completely different form, there was
something similar. How did Kant define the mathematical sublime? I remind you, that is, the one
that corresponds to the immense, to the starry vault of the sky when the weather is fine, to the
calm sea. He defined it by telling us exactly this: your imagination is overcome, that was the first
characteristic of the mathematical sublime. Your imagination collides with a limit it cannot cross.
Nature exceeds the limits of your imagination. Anything you want, see that? Place it immediately
in parallel with, on the side of the sublime dynamic, nature reduces you to zero as a physical
being. There, nature reduces your imagination to impotence. And why does it reduce your
imagination to impotence? Because the spectacle it presents to you forces you to perpetually
change units of measurement [Pause] and not be able to maintain the previous units when you
get to the next ones. I won't go back over that because I think I commented on it in great detail.
Your imagination cannot comprehend, as Kant says; its ability to comprehend is completely
overwhelmed since it can't recall the previous units when you reach the next ones. In other
words, something exceeds the power of your imagination: it’s the immense.

Whereas in the purely mathematical evaluation of magnitudes, you can always convert one unit
into another, and you can comprehend infinitely in the conceptual form of a number. But here, in
the sublime, you are outside concepts. It is no longer about concepts, it is no longer about the
concept of the sky/heaven; I mean, it is not about the sky as a science, such as astronomy, would
analyze it. It concerns the analysis of the feeling of the sublime, that is, it concerns, as Kant says
all the time, it concerns aesthetics and not science. For if you do the conceptual analysis of the
sky, nothing else equals, obviously, the two structures of the sublime which belong to a
completely different domain, namely, which belong to the domain of lived experience. So, your
imagination encounters its limit, and this nature is pushed, this starry vault of the sky, it pushes
your imagination to its limit, that is, it makes you experience the impotence of your imagination.

But at the same time -- see, there is coexistence of the two movements, the two analyses are very
symmetrical -- but at the same time, this same nature, which reduces your imagination to
impotence, requires your reason, [Pause] and convinces your reason, that is, your spiritual
faculty, that there is a Whole of nature. [Pause] It is a Whole which is always an excess in
relation to your strengths. It is a Whole that exceeds your strengths. It is a Whole which is a ”too
much” in relation to you as a sensible being; that is, the imagination cannot satisfy, your
imagination as a sensible faculty cannot satisfy the requirement of your mind as a supersensible
faculty. Your mind, facing the starry sky, demands that it be presented with a Whole of nature,
and your imagination, which alone could provide the image of this Whole to the mind, cannot do
so.

This is why Kant will always define the sublime as a disagreement, a discordance of our

                                                                                                    21

faculties. Our faculties, instead... In everyday life, in the finite world, in the everyday world, our
faculties never cease to be exercised harmoniously, without the deplorables, right... what we feel,
we can touch, all that. What we imagine, we can remember, we can perceive, that’s, that’s… The
sublime tears us away from ourselves. Why? Because it induces in our faculties a state of
discordance. But you see that the two discordances, the mathematical discordance and the
dynamic discordance, echo each other wonderfully, but they are not the same. In one case, you
have a discrepancy… I would almost say that, in the case of the mathematical sublime, there is a
sharp discordance between the two aspects of time, the interval and the Whole. [Pause] Your
imagination reaches its limit which is not adequate to the Whole; it cannot cross [the limit], it is
reduced to zero or, if you prefer, the interval gets shorter and shorter. But your mind continues to
demand a presentation of the Whole of nature, the Whole being too much.

That's what I was trying to explain about… So, suddenly, coming back to cinema, the French
school of cinema, when [Abel] Gance says things… Here, Gance's texts would be very beautiful
because for Gance, this would be cinema of the mathematical sublime. You will tell me right
away: objection, I suppose, objection. Precisely the storm, the storm, the railway accident in “La
Roue” [1923], the storm in “Napoleon” [1927], okay. All right, things are always more
complicated than people say. That doesn't prevent it from being a mathematical conception of the
sublime. For a very simple reason, it’s because what counts above all is movement, the Whole of
movement. And I tried to explain the last times how the Whole of movement, he was trying to
obtain it as much by polyvision, as by simultaneity, and by superimpositions. And in fact,
superimposition, Gance’s famous superimpositions -- when he tells us: I’m throwing 24
superimpositions at you, I know fully that you will not see them, but they will act on your soul --
this is exactly, this is exactly the Kantian theme. He goes so far as to say -- he attributes this to
Nietzsche; I don't know which text by Nietzsche; it may be in Nietzsche -- he says: as Nietzsche
says, it is the souls that envelop the bodies and not the reverse. It’s the souls that envelop the
bodies and not the reverse. This is because, in fact, although he’s taking movement in space,
what interests him is the relationship of movement in space with the soul. And I would say this is
a conception, despite everything, of the mathematical sublime, namely, it is this “too much”, or
this excess in relation to our imagination that exists in time as Whole, or in the idea of a Whole
of movement. With our imagination reduced to impotence, going beyond imagination and
realizing oneself as a spiritual being, all that, Gance’s texts, which are completely lyrical,
completely, go entirely in this direction.

In the dynamic sublime, it's something else, you see; at the same time, it’s quite comparable.
Once again, I am reduced to zero as a physical being, and at the same time, a spiritual faculty
awakens in me which reduces to zero that which reduces me to zero, which reduces this sensible
nature to zero. Fine. I would say, then, in our own language, let's return to this: the mathematical
sublime is the extensive sublime, and it's the relationship, I would say, it's exactly the
relationship of the image-movement to the two aspects of time, the interval and the Whole. The
dynamic sublime, I would say suddenly, is the relationship between intensive movement and
time with a double aspect of time: the order of time, that is, time which plunges into the abyss,
[Pause] and the instant. And this translates the soul and light, this time, just as earlier it was the
soul and movement. For the dynamic sublime, in fact, in both cases, Kant will say that nature is
only apparently sublime. The true sublime is the mind which affirms itself as a faculty through
the sublime, through the sublime of nature, on the occasion of the sublime of nature, and in one

                                                                                                        22

case, it is the soul which affirms itself as the soul of movement, and in the other case, it is the
soul which affirms itself as the soul of light... [Interruption of the recording]

… its side, its side, its too rational side would have to be suppressed. It would have to be taken
almost much more in the direction of the imperative since, in this time, in fact, we cross the
moment, we reach moment zero, we are reduced to nothing, even if it means then becoming the
distance infinite. And there, we obviously circulate following an order of time. But what is this
order? This is very different from our previous aspects of time.20 It's as if, it's not... On the one
hand, it's no longer the variable present, it's the instant. But what is the instant? -- Here, I’m
really stating things in the simplest way. -- The instant, or the lived instant, is the presentiment
that something which is posited as future, in a reflective way, is in fact already here. This is the
instant.

You live an instant moment when, at the same time, I would say, you posit something as to come,
that is, eventual or probable or certain, and you discover, in another way, you discover that it is
already here. In other words, the instant is before [en deçà] the future. It's what precedes the
future, in what sense? I could just as well say: it is the imminence of the future. Well, no, well,
no, it's not at all far off, that's it, it's already here. At that moment, you are living an instant. Ah
no, it's not tomorrow; oh, I thought it was tomorrow. No, it's here, it's now. Good. Imminence,
the substitution of imminence for the future, that’s what the instant is. Good. Does that happen to
us all the time, for example, a feeling of death? I’m not choosing the happiest [example], but
earlier that was very… or else, the feeling that it's already there.

So, in old age, we have that; in old age, then, this time, it’s the reverse. Through a rational
faculty, we think of death in the future, but somewhere, we know very well that it was already
here. It is already [here], well yes, not for you, but for me, it is already here. Ah yes, well, I think
it’s… but that’s not true, fine. Understand? It's really the future’s substitution with a before [en
deçà] of the future, of an “on this side” of the future, an imminence. We very rarely have it; it's
exactly as if someone, I have the feeling that there is something, someone behind my back, and I
say, oh well, he's already here. But it's already here, right, all that, it's already over. In a way, it's
already over.

But what comes along with that? There is a compensation. It’s that, at the same time as the future
gives way to imminence, which is something completely different from the future, it’s something
completely different from the future, it’s really on this side of the future. Do you think it's for
tomorrow? In fact, it's already here. It's the “already here” of the future, right, imminence, and, in
the same movement, an infinite retreat of the past. That's also the instant, it's the two phases of
the instant: it substitutes the imminent for the future, that is, a before of the future, and it
constitutes itself as a beyond the past, it tears open the past. That is, what happened yesterday
seems centuries ago to you, centuries ago. You see someone, or you remember, what happened
two years ago, you remember, and it's the same feeling of aging. Aging has both of them. You see
someone you saw eight days ago, you tell yourself: no, no, it's not possible; it's as if it’s been
centuries, all that is over, all that is over. It's not, it's not sad, right, it's not sad at all.

It is a beyond of the past, a before of the future, the contamination of both. It's as if time there
had entered a corner in time that knocked it off its hinges. The infinitely distant past, the future,

                                                                                                    23

which is as if reversed, right? So, we will no longer speak, at the level of this time, of intensity;
we will no longer speak of the immensity of the future and the past. We will speak, on the
contrary, of this kind of disjunction between an immemorial and an imminent, an immemorial,
that is, a beyond of the past, an imminent, a before of the future. And it would be this, this kind
of order of time, this order of time with, as a correlate, the instant. Fine, it’s possible.

But it remains for us to see, then, what would this order of time be, always in relation to light.
We have just discovered that light, just like movement, movement has a fundamental concern
with the soul, and light has a fundamental concern with the soul, in one case in the form of
intensive movement, in the other case, in the form of the extensive movement. What we need is
really, really to manage to create for intensive movement what we’ve done, that is, to imagine.
Let us try to imagine the story of the relations between light and the soul, it being said that these
relations are going to be very precisely the content of our image of time, namely of this intensive
time which emerges from light, or of the intensive composition that emerges from intensive
movement. I mean, the whole journey of relations of soul and light is going to constitute the time
of intensity. So, if that’s what it is, what would happen? We would have to reach something as
complete as what we tried to do for extensive movement.

And fortunately, I was saying, it seems to me that we find elements that will jump across history.
At the beginning of the 17th century, [there’s] this bizarre author I was telling you about, Jakob
Böhme, Jakob Böhme, who tells us a very, very, very important story about the soul and light,
since it will animate all of German Romanticism, and in particular, a philosopher called
[Friedrich] Schelling, and just before, Goethe who, knowing Jakob Böhme very well, and who is
concerned with the same problems of the soul and of light, since that’s what “Faust” is, [Pause]
the Romantic problem of the spirit of evil, that's it. [Pause] That's part of it all, right, “Faust”.
Goethe had written his Treatise on Colors, and his treatise on color is one of the greatest texts on
colors as degrees of light, and the book ends on the relationship between color and soul.

And finally, if we try to connect cinema, just as we had for Gance, obviously, [there’s] German
Expressionism, which never ceased to take up the same story, namely: the light-image. For
they’re the ones are interested in light over movement, and they’re the ones for whom
movement, however strong they push it, and God, how they push it in all directions, and for
them, movement is subordinate to light; movement is only there to produce effects of light. This
is precisely the opposite of the French school which, it seems to me, establishes the
subordination of light to movement. [Deleuze coughs]

And they will come back to the problems, not of color, why? For a very simple reason. They will
do it their way. I mean, it turns out that the whites and blacks of Impressionism [Deleuze means
Expressionism] make up all the colors, make up all the colors, in what way? Does it make up all
the colors? It composes at least one color, and that of Expressionism, sorry, and that's where
Expressionism has always recognized itself in its favorite color, namely red. And why do they
obtain red effects? And why did one of the greatest Expressionists [Deleuze coughs] himself
consider that his problem with light, or one of his problems with light, was producing red?
Producing invisible red, producing red, that's Murnau.

To make light sparkle, and to make it sparkle in such a way that the characters are captured as if

                                                                                                          24

in a kind of reddish brilliance, reddish brilliance, which will be that, well, which will be that of
the spirit of evil par excellence, namely: Nosferatu on luminous background, Nosferatu on a
background of light, a silhouette, like a kind of flattened silhouette on a background of light.
Why is this, why is this brilliance of the image in Murnau? I think it's the…, of all film authors,
he's the one who has achieved the most, or who made the most of light, really a brilliance, a
phosphorescence, you know. And all the more so, in his "Faust" [1926], where precisely the
reddishness of the light, the red light, there, takes on a meaning… good. But, do we… I mean,
we have to start all over again because at that point, you have to enter into the problem of the
light-spirits relationships – the words don’t matter when I say -- soul, spirit.

And I’m saying that Böhme – we'll stop soon, you should be able to take a bit more, right? -- and
I’m saying that Böhme was beginning, he was beginning a very, very curious story in which he
told us more or less: well, here it is, God is light -- I'm outlining greatly, right, as much as I was
attached to Kant's specifics, here, Böhme, I’m trying to extract themes that you also find in
Schelling – God is light, only there you are, light – hey, that should tell us something – that's
what we don't see. Light is what we do not see. It is the most hidden, it is the most buried. Light
is God, but the God is the hidden.

I would say, if I was trying to establish my propositions, here is the initial proposition. You will
tell me, but what does that mean, are they mystics? Not at all; as we have seen, that means an
extremely simple thing: light by itself and in its state of diffusion -- this is considered in a certain
way by Bergson --, light in its state of pure diffusion, it’s by nature invisible. It is all the more
invisible because there is no eye to see it. There is nothing. It diffuses, but it is not only because
there is no eye. As long as light diffuses, it is invisible. What makes it visible? Remember -- and
here in my opinion, it's obvious that Bergson was only making more rational, expressing more
rationally this vision of German Romanticism – well, what makes light visible is when it collides
with an opaque body which reflects it and refracts it. Otherwise, purely diffuse light is invisible.
In other words, light becomes visible when it hits a black screen, Bergson tells us.

So, let's accept this as a very old theme, which you can interpret theologically, which you can
interpret metaphysically, which you can interpret poetically, which you can interpret
scientifically. No matter, at this level of science, it is not very complicated in fact. It makes sense
on its own. Light becomes visible when it collides with an opaque body which reflects it. It's not
complicated. There we are.

So, this is what he tells us, this is what Böhme tells us: God is light, [Pause] but by that very
fact, [God] does not manifest itself. It [God] is not because it is light that it manifests itself; it is
because it is light that it does not manifest itself, it is because it is light that it is the invisible. But
insofar as it is light, it is possessed by something which is not to be confused with it, but which is
deepest in it, which is not itself, but which is what Böhme already calls the "depthless within it"
[sans-fond en lui], and the depthless within it, it’s the will to manifest itself. In all of this, Hegel
is not far off. The depthlessness of God is the will to manifest itself. God is the unmanifest light,
but the depthlessness of God is the will to manifestation. Alright, well, that's the first moment.
How beautiful the world was in that era! God only had to do… [Deleuze does not finish the
sentence]

                                                                                                       25

A second moment, it’s the wrath of God, what Böhme calls the wrath of God. I am angry,
namely, God is going to oppose pure opacity, that is, dark shadows [ténèbres], to move on to its
own manifestation. [Pause] And the wrath of God is the act by which God or light sets up
darkness as a condition of its manifestation. At that moment, and in relation to this darkness
which opposes light, it seems that the light becomes white. The wrath of God is the confrontation
of white and black. The light has become white in relation to dark shadows. This is the first
manifestation.

You will tell me, there, it’s still not very scientific. Yes and no. In fact, it takes on a very mystical
appearance, this thing which opposes itself a limit to manifest itself, this light which is..., etc.,
but you can translate it very easily: it is in fact the passage from light to the opposition pair:
white and black. Black will be darkness, darkness in its pure state; white will be light in relation
to this darkness. That's it, but for the moment, nothing is manifesting; these are the conditions of
the manifestation. [Pause]

I'm just saying, a third moment – quickly, so you can catch up if necessary, and we'll leave it at
that -- for something to manifest -- everything is ready, for manifestation -- but for something to
manifest, what does it take? It takes a little more than the conditions of the manifestation. The
darkness needs to lighten a little bit under the light, [Pause] and the white, the opposite of
darkness, needs white to darken a little bit under the darkness.21 When white darkens a little
under the darkness, you have yellow which is an obscuring, a darkening of the white. When the
black of the shadows fades a little bit, you have blue, which is a fading of black. [Pause] Yellow
and blue are the form of the manifestation of things; things manifest as yellow or as blue. Yellow
and blue race the outline of things. This third stage is the stage of what Schelling will splendidly
call "the outline" [le contour], or "egoism". [Pause] Selfishness is things that are like “I”’s, that
have outlines. One more effort, which will show us everything, and then you’ll think about it.

You've faded the black, fourth step. It turns out that you cannot stop, because it always turns out,
ever since light wanted to manifest, it was the movement of intensity, the intensive movement as
such. [Pause] So white and black, yellow and blue, were degrees caught in this movement, but
you can't stop. This movement is inseparable from an intensification of terms. What will the
intensification be? The intensification of blue, that’s well known, it’s… Rather what happens
when a color is intensified, when you apply several layers, when you bring it to completion?
There, for once, the physical experiences, everyone agrees, the experiences… more and more
there emerges, emerges a glimmer, a reflection, a brilliance, which can be called “reddish”
[rougeâtre]. And in the intensification of blue, you have the formation of a brilliance which will
be called “blue-red”, and in the intensification of yellow, you have a brilliance which will be
called “yellow-red”.

And at the outcome of the intensification of the two, you have what? You have a red which is
neither yellow nor blue, which we will call purple, to give it a special name, which we will call
purple, which does not exist in the rainbow, since the blue-red and the yellow-red do not
intersect, but which exists in chemistry and in dyeing, in which the dyer and the chemist hold a
secret, which is what? Which is not that of nature, which is the secret of the spirit. Red, red is the
secret of the spirit since it is the intensification of the two optical colors, and the formation of the
two, I would say, physical colors, blue and yellow, and the formation of a third color, which is

                                                                                                                   26

the spiritual color, red. [Pause] But you see that this is tragic because what's red going to be? It's
going to be the blaze of colors, and it's going to be the blaze of the world, and it's going to be fire
in a pure state, or it's going to be the spirit of evil, signed Mephisto, or signed Nosferatu. And it
is through the spirit of evil that the spirit penetrates the world.

Oh, well then… So, there we are, this is just so you might think about this, [Laughter] right?
Fine, we’ll come back to this next time. [End of the recording] [2:43:03]

Notes

  See the discussion of Murnau and Wim Wenders in The Movement-Image, pp. 22-24.
  On Wenders, see session 10 of the Cinema seminar 1, February 23, 1982.
  On Burch's analysis, see The Movement-Image, pp. 46-47; Deleuze talks about this mobility effect in the previous
session, March 22, 1983.
  Here begins the omission of 3 paragraphs on the Paris 8 and WebDeleuze sites.
  See The Movement-Image, p. 24, where Deleuze quotes Bazin, Qu’est-ce que le cinéma? (Paris: Editions du Cerf,
1958).
  On Gilbert Simondon and modulation, see the session in the A Thousand Plateaus IV seminar, February 27, 1979;
see also session 5 in the seminar on Painting, May 12, 1981, where Deleuze refers to Simondon's text L'individu et
sa genèse physico-biologique (Paris: PUF, 1964); Deleuze addresses the molding-modulation distinction in The
Movement-Image, pp. 23-24, and note 21.
   Here the transcription on the Paris 8 and WebDeleuze sites resumes.
  Notably, see session 2, November 23, 1982.
  Here begins, on the one hand, part 2 of the transcription on the Paris 8 site and, on the other hand, in part 1, 30
minutes of omitted text, although contained (yet misplaced) in part 2.
   This may be a reference Session 10 of the Cinema seminar 1, February 23, 1982.
   Although Deleuze pronounces this term as presented here, Messiaen's composition is written "Chronochromie"
(1958).
   On this vague reference, see session 12 of the seminar on Spinoza, March 10, 1981, where Deleuze attributes
this quotation, without exact source, to Diderot.
    Deleuze develops this reference to "Hamlet" in several texts and seminars, notably in sessions 5 and 12 of
Cinema seminar 3, December 13, 1983 and February 28, 1984; see also the seminar on Kant, session 5; in Essays
Critical and Clinical, trans. Daniel W. Smith and Michael A. Greco (1993; Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1997), “On Four Poetic Formulas That Might Summarize The Kantian Philosophy”, pp. 27-35; finally, see
The Time-Image, pp. 40-41, 112, 270-271.

   On the sublime and the formless, see The Movement-Image, pp. 53-54.
   Kant, Critique of Judgment, Book B, para. 29.
   See the poem by Paul Fort, “Le bercement du monde" [The lulling of the world] in which this verse appears, at
the poem’s end: "Je me tenais debout entre les genêts d’or, dans le soir où Dieu jette un grand cri de lumière... et
je levais tremblant la palme de mon corps vers cette grande Voix qui rythme l’Univers" [I was standing between
the golden broom trees, in the evening where God threw a great cry of light… and trembling I raised the palm of
my body toward the great Voice that rhythms the Universe].
   Critique of Judgment, Book B, para. 26 [in fact, para. 29, in “General Comment on the Exposition of Aesthetic
Reflective Judgment”].
   No doubt, in Hugo’s Les Travailleurs de la mer (1864) and Quatre-Vingt-Treize (1874).
   Kant, The Critique of Judgment, Book II, Part B, para. 28. While I begin this quote with the translation by Werner
S. Pluhar, Critique of Judgment (Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Co., 1987), p. 121, I follow Deleuze’s
enunciation of the paragraph which seems to depart from the sense of Pluhar’s translation: “This self-estimation

                                                                                                                      27

loses nothing from the fact that we must find ourselves safe in order to feel this exciting liking so that (as it might
seem), since the danger is not genuine, the sublimity of our intellectual ability might also not be genuine.”
   On the order of time, see The Time-Image, pp. 273-276.
   Here ends both part 1 and part 2 of the transcription on Paris 8 and WebDeleuze.