1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema, Truth, and Time: The Falsifier, 1983-1984

Lecture 11, 07 February 1984 (Cinema Course 55)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Arnaud Iss (Part 1), proofread Tsiomo Mpika, revised:
Marie Brémond (Part 2) and Héctor González Castaño (Part 3); additional revisions to the
transcription and time stamp, Charles J. Stivale

Translation: Billy Dean Goehring

Part 1

We didn’t forget—now we’re to the philosophy part of the course. After having spent some time
looking at cinema, we’re back to philosophy. I was nuts, I must have been out of my gourd last
time, when I said we were going to clear… —So, yeah, side note: we have a break coming up, or
rather, we’re going to be between terms from the 13th to the 27th, then we meet again on the 28th,
I think. But I’m sure we’ll still be in each other’s hearts. [Laughter]

What I’d like for you to keep in mind, then, is that our project is the same on both tracks. Thus,
what I’m looking for—on a completely different timeline and, as we’ll see, perhaps using
different concepts—is ultimately something that develops both in philosophy as well as in
cinema, a development in thought. And it always revolves (this time in philosophy) around the
relationship between movement and time: under what circumstances is time subordinated to
movement? In what circumstances is time freed from movement? And what happens when time
is freed from movement?

With that, you can tell we’re in familiar territory. At the same time, I wonder—and this is why I
said it was crazy for me to talk like we were going to get through it all in one day, because we’re
going to take a longer look at philosophy, since what I want to show you is how this whole series
of events is, at the same time, rather straightforward, easy to follow, but also rather nuanced.
That is, we have to be wary of ready-made propositions like, I don’t know, “the eternal return is
an ancient way of thinking”—because that’s not true—or that, on the flip side, “historical time is
a modern way of thinking”—because that’s not true. So, then, we then have to take all these
things into account.

In the end, what background problem am I trying to… [Pause] It’s no accident that, since the
start of the year, I’ve been trying to reflect on the idea, “Everything is ordinary.” Certainly not
because I think that phrase is the final word on the matter. On the contrary, I believe that
“Everything is ordinary,” such as I was trying to pin down in a certain approach to cinema,
which we’ll also find in philosophy—everything is ordinary, everything is banal—I think the
idea itself isn’t as important as what it leads to, and that insofar as it leads us to do or understand
something, it transforms. Then why is this motto not the last word on the matter? I think what it

                                                                                                      2

is, is the axis things revolve around. In other words, what is time? I’d say that time is everyday
banality. It’s everyday banality.

However, this day-to-day banality runs the gamut. We don’t experience it the same way, and so
it’s complicated. [Pause] What I’m saying is, there’s day-to-day banality. [Pause] I think of
everyday banality, “everydayness,” as an axis. I might say: time is quotidian. Which isn’t a
definition; it’s another way of saying that time, right, is quotidian, it’s the most everyday thing
there is; it’s at the heart of what constitutes everydayness, see. But as an axis, everydayness
might be thought of as [Pause] precisely the milieu from which I rise above the day-to-day.
[Pause] You can’t say what philosophy is without relating it to everyday life and the certainties
of everyday life.

We can only answer the question, “Why philosophy?” if we can demonstrate why everyday
thinking isn’t enough. Since everyday life isn’t just a form of activity—commute-work-sleep.
Everyday life is a way of thinking, which includes a particular sort of thought known as
“opinion.” Opinion is quite substantial, and thinking in terms of opinion can be all too easy.
Philosophy is justified replacing opinion with its own concepts [Pause] only if we can determine
what philosophy has to do with everyday life, both negatively and positively. [Pause]

Now, I argue that, in a way, we can imagine this relationship in the form: everyday life is a
milieu I lift up out of—toward what? Toward what we’ll call discovering or meditating on the
eternal, on something which isn’t everyday. [Pause] And the relationship between meditating on
the eternal and everyday life is such that everyday life isn’t just any sort of everyday life.
Everyday life is opposed to meditating on the eternal; they’re distinct but meditating on the
eternal implies a relationship with that from which it’s distinguished.

I could just as well say [Pause] belief in the Sabbath—“And on Sunday, God rested”—what does
it mean to say that “God rested on Sunday”? [Pause] It doesn’t mean he just stops because, as St.
Augustine himself asks, “How could God stop?” We stop, we suspend the course of our day-today life, our everydayness, so that we can manage to meditate on something that isn’t everyday,
to meditate on the eternal. Good. [Pause]

What’s going on? What do we make of everyday life stopping on Sunday, i.e., allowing for
meditation on the eternal, [Pause] and referring to such meditation as something other than
itself? See, that’s ultimately what I’m interested in. What’s going on? Perhaps such life,
seemingly without changing anything, could just as easily be set up differently, in a “never
Sunday” mode, where Sunday is always tomorrow. [Pause] What does everyday life do, then?
See, I’d argue that everydayness is no longer cyclical, that there are no more Sundays. Everyday
life takes the form of an infinite straight line. Obviously, there might still be Sundays, pseudoSundays, on this straight line, but everydayness, right, is no longer connected to meditating on
the eternal, to Sunday meditation, meditation which would simultaneously be both part of it and
separate from it, twisting back like a circle looping back in on itself. Everydayness has been
stretched out.

Could I say, then, putting everything together, since we’ll have to account for everything, that
now it’s a sort of urban everydayness? [Pause] Right. And the axis has changed; everydayness

                                                                                                       3

has become that of a uniform, homogeneous time, [Pause] a single-file everydayness. [Pause]
And now everydayness is no longer connected to meditation on the eternal. Again, there are no
more Sundays. What do we have? See, now everydayness is linked to something quite…
[Interruption of the recording] [12:52]

… and to meditating on the eternal, to Sunday. [Pause] Philosophy, on the other hand, will
connect everydayness to the production of something new—not meditating on something eternal,
but producing something new. [Pause]

And the problem of time takes on a completely different character. Turning to a passage from
Heidegger, one I find rather strange, rather interesting. In Being and Time, he writes, “In a
preliminary way, its analysis”—never mind that—“the focus of the analysis was not the
possibility of the existence of a determined, characterized existent”—or, if you want, we could
bracket the Heideggerian language and say, our analysis isn’t about a defined, determinate
existential possibility—“but is directed toward its dull and average way of existing”—but was
directed toward the dull and average way of existing—“We called the manner of being in which
the existent is immediately caught up ‘everydayness’—we called the way of being which the
existent most often engages in its “everydayness.”1—And of course, we find out that, for
Heidegger, everydayness is at the same time an allegedly “inauthentic” mode of existence. Even
so, we don’t buy it; we know that’s too simple. Just like in Bergson, there’s a distinction between
authentic and inauthentic, only for Bergson it’s between a so-called superficial “ego” and a more
profound “ego.” But the distinction isn’t an opposition at all. It’s insofar as everyday banality
runs its course that the production of something new becomes possible.

Driving the point home further—because I’d like us to end up elucidating these concepts—I’d
say it’s the same difference as that between transcendence and transcendent, why it’s necessary
to distinguish between transcendence and transcendent. In rough and ready terms, what is
transcendent? It describes a thing, it’s a way of describing a thing that implies that it is “beyond,”
“elsewhere,” “above,” [Pause] “above time,” [Pause] “above movement,” “above myself.”
[Pause] And in this sense, using the word “form,” I can say that the transcendent, something
transcendent, is an eternal, immobile form. [Pause]

Famously, what was a crucial turning point in the history of philosophy? When “transcendent”
no longer described—or “transcendence” no longer described the state of a thing and instead
described the activity of a subject. [Pause] How would “transcendent” or “transcendence”
describe the act of a subject? It applies to the activity of a subject insofar as the latter is exceeded
by or exceeds what it is given. [Pause] At which point, we’ll say that it transcends the given, i.e.,
that it goes beyond it. What does it mean to go beyond the given? [Pause] Going beyond the
given is, by definition, belief. What does it mean to “believe”? [Pause] What is… Believing is
different from knowing, and it’s also different from having faith. To believe means to infer; it
means positing something that is not given based on something that is given. [Pause]

I say, “The sun will rise tomorrow.” I say, “Julius Caesar existed.” These are beliefs. [Pause]
Indeed, right, “Julius Caesar existed”—what do I “know”? I learned it from books. [Pause] That
is, I infer from certain signs, the existence of certain signs given to me, the existence of Julius
Caesar, which is not given to me. “The sun will rise tomorrow.” Yes, I’ve always seen it rise. I

                                                                                                    4

infer from what’s given to me—it rose this morning, it rose yesterday, etc.—I infer: it will rise
tomorrow. But by definition, tomorrow is not given. Tomorrow only appears to me when it
becomes today. I go beyond what I’m given. Right. In my most day-to-day activity, I exceed
what I’m given. Isn’t that the time of everyday banality? [Pause]

Here, instead of transcendence describing the state of particular things—substances—of certain
higher, essential things, etc., we have transcendence as the act of going beyond, the act of a
subject going beyond, [Pause] and this going beyond produces something new. [Pause] See,
everything proceeds as though my axis were this everyday banality, the axis of my everyday life,
and along that axis… “I rise toward the transcendent, at least on Sundays, through knowledge or
faith”—that’s why knowledge, faith, and the relationship between the two will be so important
for philosophy, throughout all of the Middle Ages, throughout all of the Renaissance, throughout
the entire 17th century.

And then, coming back to the axis of my everyday life, its everydayness now takes on a
completely different meaning: the temporality of everyday life is characterized by the act of
transcending, that is, it’s directed toward something completely different, the production of
something new, in the mode of belief and not knowledge or faith, which it had discovered by
meditating on the eternal. What’s going on? Everydayness figures into both cases. What happens
in either case? That’s what concerns me. Depending on the status of everydayness, you get, you
get different understandings of philosophy. At the end of the day, we ought to entertain questions
like: “What is rural everydayness? What is urban everydayness?” With the transformation of
everyday life, don’t we have to consider the development of cities? Aren’t there a lot of things
we have to take into account? But, I mean, at the heart of the problem with the time-movement
relationship, we get to something that philosophy has always struggled with—the status of
everydayness and philosophy’s relationship with the everyday.

Assuming that’s the case, then back to what I was saying. I’m saying we ought to look more
closely at this point in time where, at first glance, it seems that time is subordinated to
movement, or that it derives from movement, exactly like what we saw with cinema. And that
this time, in fact, it takes a philosophical montage to derive time from movement. So, that’s what
I set out to do last time, and then I thought, no, no, I’m getting ahead of myself.

Because if we want to say that the Greeks, for example, viewed time as subordinate to movement
and movement as subordinate to eternity, we’d first need to understand how the two are linked,
but that isn’t at all obvious. Last time, I had already touched on the eternal return, but the eternal
return is so strange that it often comes across as myth, and it’s anything but myth. I think that for
the Greeks… Again, we’re bracketing Nietzsche, because what Nietzsche wickedly manages to
do is absolutely reinterpret the eternal return in a way wholly bound up with modern philosophy,
which even contributes to the foundation of modern philosophy—there’s a kind of stunning
playfulness in Nietzsche’s take on it, what he does with a concept already so laden with meaning,
with ancient and respected interpretations. Remember, how every time he brings up the eternal
return, he calls it a secret, right. How Zarathustra isn’t mature enough to discover it. How
Zarathustra’s animals say, “Yes, everything returns, everything returns, everything returns,” and
Zarathustra says, “Shut up! You’re already making a mockery of it.” Zarathustra couldn’t be any
clearer: “No, my eternal return does not mean that everything returns.” Zarathustra’s animals are

                                                                                                      5

the ones who portray it that way, and each time, twice, Zarathustra tells them, “Back in your
kennel! That’s not it.” To his eagle and snake. “You’ve already made it into a song.” In other
words, you’ve already turned it into a refrain [ritournelle]. You’ve made it into a little song, a
refrain, a circularity. So, we’re bracketing all that.

For the Greeks, the eternal return took two basic forms. It had an astronomical form, which
we’ve discussed: how the seven planets come back to the same arrangement in relation to the
sphere of fixed stars. Then there’s a version which isn’t astronomical but which we might think
of as physicalist. This time, it’s the transformation of qualitative elements: air, earth, water, fire.
First of all, we have to keep them straight because it gets complicated—I mean, for anyone who
would like to look a bit further into this stuff—it gets complicated, because they don’t
necessarily go together. Sometimes they complement each other, sometimes they butt heads. For
some pre-astronomical thinkers, what they have in mind isn’t an astronomical eternal return. On
the contrary, they’re working with a physical, physicalist eternal return. Others strike a sort of
balance, leaning one way or the other, and so on. Anyway, it’s complicated. It’s complicated.
But it’s either physics or it’s astronomy—it certainly isn’t myth.

That’s why when someone like [Mircea] Eliade portrays the eternal return as an old myth, I
mean, it’s not even a question, “Is it a myth or not?”2 As we’ll see, it’s obviously not a myth.
What’s more, it can’t be myth. Understand, in the case of the cosmological… uh, astronomical
eternal return, it’s based on—how should I put this?—an astronomy that accounts for local
position; it’s an astronomy of local positions, the local positions of the different planets, [Pause]
that is, it’s an eternal return rooted in local motion. [Pause]

The physicalist eternal return is one based, not on local motion, but on qualitative change, on
how qualities transform into each other and form a cycle. So, you can already tell why it gets
complicated, because suppose that—and once again we find ourselves dealing with problems
where, if you will, you cannot say that some are right or some are wrong—suppose you were to
think of astronomical bodies, planets, as eternal bodies. Thus, they’d be exempt from any
qualitative change. Thus, they’re what determine the qualitative changes in mortal bodies. At
which point, we’d say that the astronomical eternal return takes priority over the physicalist
eternal return. However, say we think of planetary bodies as bodies like any other, as describable
and described bodies. [Pause] In that case, the local motion of the planets is clearly subordinate
to the play of qualitative transformations or physical changes. In which case, it’s the physicalist
eternal return that has priority over the astronomical return.

It’s complicated, but no matter how you look at it, we’re no longer dealing with myth. Why not?
Here I think we’re getting to something essential for the subject at hand. This is from [Pierre]
Vidal-Nacquet, an excellent historian of Greek antiquity—it’s already an old essay at this point,
but Vidal-Nacquet writes, all the same, we shouldn’t put too much stock in all these claims about
cyclical time; you won’t find any cyclical time in any of the great myths of Ancient Greece. You
find the opposite, even. [Pause] And he refers a lot—he refers to Hesiod a lot. You could always
look for cyclical time in Homer. You could always say that Homer doesn’t say all that much
about time, right. Homer was the 9th century B.C. Here, you need a little bit of a sense for… But
there’s another major Greek poet, Hesiod, 8th century A.D [B.C.], who was very interested in
time. He’s interested in it in two ways. We’ll see why it tormented him. We have two of his

                                                                                                     6

surviving poems; it’s rare to have that much.— [Pause] Well, things are off to a good start: I
forgot my first passage. Like I was saying, The Odyssey… [Pause] not Works and Days, it’s the
other one, [Pause] uh, this is embarrassing, I’m drawing a blank; doesn’t anybody remember…
[Deleuze looks for his text; someone calls out the title] Ah! The Theogony! Thank you. The
Theogony. –

Now, what is The Theogony? It’s a genealogy of the gods, a linear genealogy, the sort that goes:
and so-and-so begat so-and-so, who begat so-and-so, who begat so-and-so—which comes
awfully close, all things considered, to certain passages in the Old Testament: a huge linear
genealogy. Why do we not get even a hint of circularity in The Theogony? [Pause] What do we
find? The time it describes is extraordinarily eventful. It’s a time of clashing generations, each
overthrowing the next. It’s a wild time. A wild time, I mean, an unchained, untamed time.

Now, ultimately what I have here is an idea beautifully worked out by [Jean-Pierre] Vernant in
The Origins of Greek Thought—this is what the time of myth is.3 I’d more or less say that the
sort of time that belongs to myth is a wild, untamed time, [Pause] i.e., time as an abyss, where
successive generations emerge, where they battle—a terrible time, a time of terror, a fathomless
time, fathomless terror and fathomless struggle between gods. [Pause]

And why, what does this have to do myth? This is what strikes me as so important and
profoundly apt about Vernant’s thesis. Why isn’t there specifically a time… It’s the same thing.
You’ll notice how, in a way, circular time has always, I claim, meant putting time in a circle. It
needs to be put into a circle; it isn’t a circle on its own, it isn’t a circle on its own. To put time
into a circle is to tame it, to make it obedient. Obedient to what? Well, to some very deep-seated
needs, no doubt, but it has to be done! What myth gives us is an embroiled, untamed time. But
why? We don’t have an answer as to why myth foments an untamed time, a wild sort of time,
with wild seeds, wild seeds yielding abominable gods. That’s what myth is! [Pause] Really, it’s
this bottomless sort of time.

I find Vernant’s response quite rigorous. He says that myth always has two extremes. It ranges
between origin stories and establishing order. [Pause] It goes from origin to sovereignty. In that
sense, you might say that all myths are myths of sovereignty. The mythical model is necessarily
monarchical. I’m just paraphrasing Vernant’s argument—it goes from the beginning, or from the
bottom, to sovereignty, to domination, and the question it addresses is: “If things begin with
chaos, when and how could any order have been established?” [Pause] Thus, a myth bridges the
gap between the origin of things and sovereignty, that is, the establishment of order. Once there’s
no longer any distance between the origin of things, between the absolute origin and established
sovereignty, once this gap between them is gone, there’s no more myth. [Pause]

And what do we learn from Hesiod’s Theogony? That everything begins in chaos, [Pause] and
then how a subsequent genealogy is set into motion when chaos combines with something else.
This something else, is it also chaos, you ask? Yes, it… Well, it isn’t order, at any rate; it
certainly isn’t order. [Pause] And then, right, each different generation—along comes the terrible
Cronos, the dreadful Cronos, born from the union of earth and sky. It’s a whole mess, from
beginning to end. For one thing, Cronos [Pause] emasculates, castrates his father, devours his

                                                                                                   7

children. Well, that’s not great, is it? And one child is saved by the earth: Zeus. [Pause] Then
Zeus deals with his own father, Cronos, and then Zeus is the one who’s sovereign.

But what about Cronos? Well, Cronos might be misleading, which is to say we have to be
careful: he isn’t “time.” Hesiod’s Cronos is written without an “H,” which matters because
Chronos, time, is written with an “H,”“C-H-R-O-N-O-S,” while Hesiod’s Cronos is “C-R-O-NO-S.” Cronos without the H isn’t time. Sure, there could always be some cross-pollination
between Chronos and Cronos, but strictly speaking, Hesiod’s No-H-Cronos doesn’t represent
Time-Chronos but has a completely different etymology, is derived from a completely different
root—it comes from craino, where we get cras, crastos, etc.4 Which refers to the act of
accomplishing, the accomplisher. Cronos is the accomplisher. What does he accomplish? What
does he accomplish? Which is why we don’t need to interpret it the other way [as “time”].

[Someone from administration brings him some files] … You have them? Ohhh [Pause]. That’s
awfully nice, but… you gave them to me. I’ve gotten them.

Admin Representative: Then they have to be turned in by March 19th at the latest.

Deleuze: March 19th?

Admin: At the latest.

Deleuze: So, that’s the last week, then! Perfect, thank you… Goodbye. [Pause]

We don’t need to interpret it the other way—it’s actually better if we don’t. It’s even better if we
don’t take it that way. For in what way is “No H” Cronos the accomplisher? He’s the
accomplisher because he bridges the divide. He fills in the gap between the origin of things
[Pause] and the establishment of sovereignty. Who establishes sovereignty? Zeus! [Pause] Zeus
will become the leader of the gods and lay down the order of the world. He is the sovereign.
Between the origin of things and the order of the sovereign, there is the Chronos of Cronos, i.e.,
the time of Cronos, the time accomplished by Cronos, meaning that Cronos is not time but the
one who accomplishes time, and time is the gap between the origin of things and sovereignty—
this gap being a wild time, untamed time, the messy time before Zeus straightens everything out.
[Pause]

And that would be what myth is, and so Vernant can move on and ask, when does philosophy
really come onto the scene? Philosophy comes about when, for a variety of reasons, the mythical
model collapses. And when does the mythical model collapse? Well, [Pause] when the two terms
held apart in myth, i.e., the origin of things and the foundation of sovereignty, come as close as
they can to overlapping. [Pause] At the very same time, the world is both formed and set in
order. [Pause] The who formed the world is simultaneously the one who puts it in order.
Mythical gods, the accomplisher and the sovereign, are succeeded or replaced by the demiurge,
the one who both makes and orders the world. [Pause] It happens at the same time; it’s the
reconciling—bordering on identification—between order and genesis, between the radical origin
of things and the organization of sovereignty which things are subject to. This identification is
what defines philosophy.

                                                                                                 8

Well, it’s a really intriguing idea since that’s indeed how I believe it goes down, how it
happened. But what does that imply? Well, it implies that the paired mythical terms—the pair
being origin-power, origin-domination, origin-sovereignty, with a temporal gap between them, a
gap filled by all the horrors of myth—are replaced by a totally new pair of terms, [Pause] that is,
the world is simultaneously both created and shaped, ordered, according to a “model.” [Pause]
The world is made and shaped based on an eternal model. In other words, the gap between origin
and sovereignty is replaced by a complementarity, a dyad between copy and eternal model. The
demiurge is the one who contemplates the eternal model, and, at the same time, both makes and
orders the world according to the model’s requirements. There is no more myth; there is
philosophy. Hence this is where we should put everything we talked about before, on the concept
of truth inasmuch as it involves this model-copy relationship. Model-copy ends up replacing
origin-sovereignty.

Now, this new philosophical relationship—model-copy—notice that it implies two things. What
are copies? Obviously, copies are images; they’re images. [Pause] And what could I say about
images, about the world-as-image? The world is created according to a model. The world is an
image. We could say that, as such, this image is both movement and change. [Pause] The
demiurge forms the image and, at the same time, orders it based on its model. What is the image?
The image is movement-change. Movement—that is, the image has two aspects: both movement
as such and local motion. Movement is essentially the passage from one position to another.
[Pause] As change, it is qualitative, the passage from one quality to another. You get both
themes: qualitative change and local motion. [Pause] The image is mobile and changing. Local
movement and qualitative change are the image’s defining characteristics.

From there, what is the demiurge’s job? Insofar as he “makes,” he makes the image and puts it in
order; those are two operations: he makes the image, and he puts it in order. But where do these
eternal forms, these models, come from, you ask? They are eternal. They’re eternal; they’ve
always been there. Are there more than one? You can hear in that every problem of Greek
metaphysics. No, in a certain light, they are “one.” But to what extent does this “one” already
imply more than one? At any rate, I might say that the model is the form of forms; it’s the form
that contains all forms as “one.” That’s already incredibly complicated, but all that to one side—
that’s not the subject at hand, what we’re worried about right now. Perhaps we’ll come back to it
in some aspect of our overall problem, but we’ll leave it alone for now.

As I was saying, the demiurge creates a moving, changing image and organizes it, closing the
gap between them. The demiurge has snuffed out myth.5 Which isn’t to say that the two
operations are no longer distinct. There’s a wonderful text—it’s beautifully written, and ought to
be read as a poem rather than a myth—it’s pretty difficult, but that’s neither here nor there.
You’re all welcome to read it if you like, even if you don’t have a background in philosophy, and
treat it like one element. It’s Plato’s Timaeus. The beginning of Plato’s Timaeus is difficult for
many reasons, but nothing a careful reading can’t handle, even if you aren’t philosophically
savvy. Because if you take it line by line, something funny starts to unfold. It can feel like you
don’t understand anything at the beginning because it’s such a…. it’s so… At first blush, it’s just
too difficult, or you’d need to be a specialist… [Interruption of the recording] [58:47]

                                                                                                    9

Part 2

…where Plato tells us that the demiurge creates material for the world. [Pause] He builds the
world’s material. He creates [Pause] this material—it’s interesting [Pause]—by combining
substances. [Pause] It gets complicated. Combining substances. Let’s call one of these
substances, “A,” [Pause – Deleuze gets up and goes to the board; he’s looking for some chalk]
the substance of the Same, the substance of the Same, there is a substance of the Same, right.
And then he combines that with another substance, the substance of the Other, right—we’ll call
that “B.” But what is this Other, this substance of the Other? Well, it’s the Other than the One;
it’s different from the Same. It’s the not-Same. That sounds strange, you think. He goes on:
however, the substance of the Other, precisely because it’s the substance of the not-Same, slips
away; it avoids getting mixed together. And so, the demiurge combines A and B by force, but B
slips through. Then he re-combines them with C—what is C? It is A + B. A third substance,
then, the substance of the Same and the Other, a compound substance. He re-combines them—if
we read the text literally, I don’t see how else to interpret it—what the demiurge does is: A + B +
(A + B). In other words, he’s trying to pin B down, which is always trying to wriggle away from
the mixture. How can he pull it off, then?

In fact, I think it’s worse than that—it’s even worse because “B avoids getting mixed in”
basically means there’s some part of it that fails to get mixed in. Really, all that gets combined is
A + (B / 2). What he says in the text isn’t all that important—this is for anyone who might be
interested in what the text literally says—because the mixture takes the form: A + (B / 2) + (A +
(B / 2). That is, once I pin B down, there’s only one B for every two A’s. Pretty clever of the
demiurge, but I’m only guessing, right, since he doesn’t say it. I won’t get into where these
substances come from. Because it’s easy to guess where substance A comes from: it comes from
the model, from eternal form. But the other substance, substance B? That remains to be seen, but
here’s how we’d start: when the demiurge has his mixture, if you accept that he carries out this
combination, Plato begins, and it all sounds pretty bizarre, but we aren’t going to just say it’s
scientifically outdated because…no. I don’t think that would make any sense. Neither can you
say he’s just being poetic. You can’t say… what can we say? You can’t say anything—admire,
follow along, try to make sense of it, right?

From there, if I’m not mistaken—I say, “if I’m not mistaken,” in case anyone specializes on The
Timaeus; fortunately, I don’t get the impression that people really focus on this bit about
mixture—but following the text as it’s written, while it enters into the mixture, Substance B
constantly resists getting mixed in. Then, you say, there’s still the problem of how it gets divided
in two. In two, that is, two times one. I’d say that’s precisely what A does, the substance of the
Same. The substance of the Same can’t force it, can’t just overpower it, but nonetheless, it has
the leverage to sort out something it does control in Substance B and something that eludes it. It
prevents B from getting away entirely—hence, B / 2. At which point, through C, we get A + (B /
2), but that only gives us one B for every two A’s. As I see it, it can’t escape any further.
Without this B / 2, I can no longer make sense of the text. So, there, okay. But from there—I’ll
spare you, since otherwise… —from there, notice how the demiurge goes about this mixture
through a whole series of “progressions,” geometric progressions, namely—as I see it, geometric
progressions are all the more reason for us to bring in a fractional B / 2 —a whole series of

                                                                                                  10

geometric progressions [Pause] and where does that leave us? I’ll spare you the details, but we
end up with a series of figures [chiffres]. [Pause]

See, then, my question is: how does he form the image? He forms the image by combining
substances [Pause] and establishing geometric proportions in their combination, geometric
proportions which determine key figures that don’t appear in their natural sequence—it isn’t 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. They follow a particular sequence based on geometric progressions. Okay, that goes on
for several pages of the Timaeus, it’s wonderful, it’s like a kind of… it’s music, you know,
music. What’s more, there are actually harmonic relationships; there are explicit comparisons
drawn with art.

And he goes on, not only—well, this is the third phase of the mixture—I’ll go over three phases,
but it all happens at the same time. There’s the combination of substances; second, the
establishment of geometric relations… sorry, geometric progressions, which determine key
figures—and third, based on these geometric progressions, we’ll find that intervals or the
medians, or means, are determined… the determination of averages. [Pause] What does “the
mean” refer to? As many of you know, it’s the average between a progression’s two extremes,
the average between a geometric progression’s two extremes, averages that change depending
[Pause] depending on the progressions in question, right?

Well, keep your finger on that. What I’m giving you is sort of the outline I used to get through it.
It’s a hefty text, after all; if you understand the Timaeus, you understand all of Greek philosophy,
right. Does this make sense? [First] Mixing, [Second] determining the mixture’s geometric
progressions, which give us figures, a sequence of numbers, a sequence of sacred numbers,
evidently. [Pause]

Third, there’s the averages, the middle terms between both extremes of each progression [Pause]
which, in turn, gives you figures and numbers. [Pause] That’s how I’d describe the formation of
the image. I’m not getting into the question: Where does Substance B come from? Substance B
is a sticky wicket; how is he going to get out of it? It’s beautiful when a philosopher finds
themselves… Philosophers have a tough job, solving problems they set for themselves. And
then, this is how you know you’re on the right track. You’re blindsided by a problem you hadn’t
thought of, and now you have to deal with it.

Which is why any objections to it won’t come from talking it over with other people.
Conversation has nothing to do with it, that’s just talking. All true objections or issues always
come… they never come from other people. It’s not when somebody says, “You’re wrong.” It’s
always some problem that catches me off guard. Any system of problems I put together always
excludes a particular problem that catches me off guard. And then I either figure out how to deal
with it, like saying, bring it on—or I don’t know what to do with it, and my theory… what I
mean is that a theory’s truth isn’t determined by its results or how it’s developed; it’s determined
by how it deals with a side problem, i.e., the problem that ends up crashing in from outside the
problem’s proper domain.

Well, Plato has this sort of side problem on his hands. Wonderful! Alright, so far, so good; that
all makes sense, save for one burning question—what about this Substance B? It’s funny.

                                                                                                11

Because I can argue that Substance A, right, is taken from its eternal model—it’s the Same, the
substance of the Same. But where does the substance of the Other come from? I can’t say that it
comes from copies, since I use it to make copies; it’s part of what I use to make the image. It’s
what I, the demiurge, use to create the world. Well, Plato should have seen that coming; he
walked right into it.

Second operation. So, the demiurge is the one who made the world. I just outlined three aspects,
three aspects. [Pause] The demiurge creates the world. Secondly, just as he creates it, he puts it
in order. And how does he arrange it? It will become clearer. Why does it happen at the same
time, why is it one and the same—creating the world and putting it in order? There’s a simple
explanation for why they’re one and the same. It’s because, in forming the world, he obtained a
number of privileged positions. [Pause] Positions indicated by different figures [chiffres],
whether these figures correspond to geometric progressions or whether they correspond to
averages, to mediants. [Pause] So long as any movement or change—so long as the image’s
local movements and qualitative changes pass through these privileged points, these privileged
positions, these privileged states, then the image will be said to copy its model.

The second part, setting things in order, solely comes down to [making] the movement pass
through the privileged positions and states laid out in the very creation of the world. [Pause] In
other words, [Pause] the image will then resemble its model. This is what the act of ordering
things comes down to: I’ve produced an image of the copy; I had to bestow it, to endow it with
resemblance. I needed the image to become similar. The solution was—having formed the world
according to a mixture that allowed me to determine privileged figures, positions and points, I
make it so that the image’s movement and changes pass through these privileged movementpoints. Meaning what? Meaning that I curve, I bend its movement. The demiurge curves and
bends movement in such a way that local motion passes through the positions, [Pause] figures
set by the mixture, and that qualitative changes go through stages set by the mixture’s figures.
[Pause] Movement is now curved. As circular motion, it imitates its model. The world is a copy
in the sense that it’s formed as an image and shaped as a likeness. [Pause]

The model-copy relationship brings us to the subject of veracity; the image is made in the
likeness of its model. All of these operations were necessary both to form the image, and on the
other hand, to give it a likeness. From there, there’s no longer any difference, no longer any gap
separating when things originate and when their order is established. The final outcome of which
is that, once movement became an image in the likeness of its model, [Pause] once movement
became circular, time was tamed; time could no longer play out in its abyss. It comes out of its
abyss. It becomes sage time, the time of wisdom, time as no more than a unit of circular motion.
It measures local, circular motion, just as it measures the cyclical transformation of qualities.
[Pause]

Then, it all happens at once—to give you an overview—when movement becomes an image of
its model, [Pause] when its image starts to resemble its model, [Pause] when its image becomes
circular motion, [Pause] i.e., a mobile image of the model, and time becomes subordinate to
movement. Its domestication means both making movement circular so that its image can
resemble what’s eternal, and making time a quantity of circular motion.

                                                                                                 12

And indeed, while we’re on the subject, what becomes of these figures, these privileged
positions? You find them again, in a precise way. As I was saying, the demiurge knows that
when movement is bent, is put into a circle, such that it passes through the mixture’s figures, its
sacred figures—what does that mean? Sure enough, what you’ll find is that we can’t talk about
circular motion without getting into how it “embodies” privileged positions and privileged states,
[Pause], i.e., the astronomical model at the heart of circular motion. What’s going on with these
privileged positions? Never mind that. For those who know a bit of astronomy, I think the easiest
examples are the equator and the ecliptic. The equator and the ecliptic are what determine the
circular movements of all the spheres we looked at last time. You remember how this astronomy
works, right, with eight spheres—an outer sphere with the fixed stars, seven spheres
corresponding to each of the seven planets, and the Earth. We covered that; I won’t go over it
again.

But what is it that determines… They don’t have the same axis; all these spheres turn on
different axes. What determines their axis? What… this is where privileged positions come in—
where do these privileged positions come from? We’ll find out shortly. So, these main privileged
positions, these sacred figures, are manifested, on the one hand, in astronomical circular motion,
[Pause] where you’ll get the equator, the ecliptic, but then, on another level—it gets so
complicated—the equinox and the solstice, [Pause] and so on implies that circular motion is
defined by its passing through key points—you can really see how tightly interconnected this all
is—and physical changes will also be described [Pause] as the passing through key states. I don’t
want to get too far into it, but Aristotle offers a rather unusual theory, albeit a beautiful one—a
theory of “contact,” contact defined as the moment when, in a physical process, form, that is, the
eternal model, force is instantaneously actualized. As he puts it, it’s the final contact between
hammer—a wonderful passage; it isn’t Plato, but it might be Platonic—it’s the final contact
between hammer and vase… no, sorry, [hammer] and bronze, where the form of the vase is
instantly realized. There’s a whole process, then, in what goes into the vase, but the form of the
vase is actualized instantaneously.

In the same way, there’s a physical transition from white to black, but the form of black is
instantly realized upon final contact, as he puts it in a great passage: “the form of the house is
instantly realized when two tiles make contact.” Does that mean the last two tiles? Undoubtedly
the final two tiles, because earlier in the process, at every point in the process, there’s a form
that’s instantaneously realized. With the first two tiles, we can already say that the roof is
instantly realized. But the physical process passes through privileged states, and with every
privileged state, a form is actualized. You know how it is—all of a sudden, it’s perfect! So, that’s
how time was tamed. That’s how the demiurge was able to tame time. You haven’t said much
about time, you’ll tell me. Of course not, because this is the story of how it was reined in by
circular motion.

Where does that leave us, then? Well, there’s one last question we need to answer. Where is
Plato getting Substance B from? It’s great. It’s great where he gets it from. He gets Substance
B… Alright—as I understand it, going out on a limb—I haven’t been satisfied by any
commentary I’ve come across, not a single one, because the interpretations I’ve looked at, even
older ones, all skirt the issue. Where does it come from? What is Substance B? [Pause] As I see
it, this is exactly what Plato says: change and movement apply to copies, while the model is

                                                                                                    13

characterized by the Same and the eternal. [Pause] Alright. Which makes that Substance A. But
he goes on—if I understand correctly—why wouldn’t there be another model? [Pause] That is,
how come change and movement only apply to the copy? Shouldn’t there also be a model of
what moves and changes? [Pause] Right. He can’t say there is one, because if there’s a model of
what moves and changes, that’s Substance B. For there to be a Substance B, it must be that
movement and change can’t just apply to images and copies; [Pause] that has to describe a
model. You see the problem, then.

Well, then, what is it? What is this Substance B? It turns out it’s wild time, wild time; [Pause]
wild time is what blind-sides him. The question is how, at this level, he’s going to get rid of wild
time, and that’s because B, the substance of the Other, isn’t the copy’s moving, changing
nature—it’s the model’s moving, changing nature. Only with this model, instead of copying it,
we desperately need to get rid of it, that is, it needs to be mixed in. It must be mixed together
with the model to be copied. You get what I’m saying? It’s only natural—there must have been
this rumbling, untamed time in order for it to later be tamed and subordinated to movement. It
has to have been there. And well, our mixture can’t really get rid of it. Plato says as much: all we
can do is combine them as best we can, and yet, remember—it will be important—there’s a
whole part that escapes, a whole part that gets away.

Anyway, moving on. We’ve almost… So, I’m circling back to what I talked about last time, and
I’ll make it quick because I’d like to get through at least the first half of this. I was saying, it’s
not hard… — Yes, if anyone wants to leave, right, since for the next several weeks I won’t be
focusing on cinema, as you’ve noticed, I’m no longer focusing on cinema. I completely
understand, then, if folks came for… when we were talking about cinema, they can skip two or
three weeks, no problem. Now, I’m doing… That’s what we’ll do all year. Our analysis will
alternate as needed, since time is primarily what I’m interested in. For the time being, I will
come back to cinematic time-images later on—soon, in fact. No hard feelings if you skip class
for a while. The way we’re doing things, you can pick back up down the road…

As I was saying last time, so far, so good. Movement becomes circular; it’s been made to
conform to a model, and as a result, time is subordinate to circular motion. Right. And it escapes
all over the place. It will constantly slip out in Greek thought. Which is why I say you always
need to keep track of nuances. It’s as though this were the delayed reaction of Substance B, the
prolonged vengeance of the half that got away. Then there’s a return to myth, in Plato. [Pause]
It’s the great payback, the final revenge of the time that got away. And what will the time that
escaped look like?

Well, I told you that this copy… circular motion, as an image resembling its model, [Pause] will
continue to present anomalies, aberrations. Such aberrations ought to be attributed to the
Substance B that got away. Circular motion won’t stop. The ordering of the cosmos won’t stop
showing us aberrations. It’s an image of movement as circular motion, having subjugated time,
that will nonetheless continue to exhibit aberrations, and as for these aberrations, what do we get
with every aberration in movement? Each of the aberrations of this bowed, disciplined
movement-image will correspond to a kind of—to put it crudely—a kind of flash at time, a flash
into an untamed time, a kind of time coming back, showing up and threatening to submerge
everything. How does this happen? I’ll cut to the chase. Take Aristotle. With Aristotle—jumping

                                                                                                   14

around, but that’s fine—we might say: with their astronomy and their eternal return, it would be
perfect if the planets directly determined physical phenomena on earth, the course of human life.
We could relax. But nothing of the sort. The closer we get to Earth, the more aberrations appear
in circular motion, and the more such aberrations indicate an untamed time, or worse, we
ourselves are given over to an untamed time.

See, it’s the exact same pattern we saw with cinema, but my hope is that we’ve discovered it on
an entirely independent basis. The closer we get to Earth—to borrow Aristotle’s beautiful turn of
phrase—“we are sublunar.” The moon, the lunar sphere, is the closest of the seven planetary
spheres to Earth. We are between the moon and the Earth; here in our atmosphere, we are
sublunar beings, creatures. Well, in our sublunar world, aberrations in movement will
immediately start to pile up within astronomy, such as what I said about rational or irrational
relationships. Astronomy is chock full of aberrations that account for irrational relationships
between… [Deleuze corrects himself] accounted for by the irrational relationships between the
different spheres.

But even if we don’t take that into account, even if we say, “It’s fine, our astronomy still
functions,” the further we go into the sublunar—and I brought up Aristotle’s hierarchy,
Aristotle’s hierarchy plays a crucial role here—Aristotle’s hierarchy basically demonstrates how
the closer we get to Earth—I’m giving you an interpretation of it, I’m giving you a version of it
that’s a bit, a bit… but, I believe it’s accurate, that the hierarchy is exactly… [remark unclear]—
the closer we get to Earth, [Pause] right, the more matter turns against form. If you like, broadly
speaking, the more the copy rebels against its model. But copy and model aren’t Aristotelian
terms; for an Aristotelian, it’s form-matter. I’d say that the closer we get to Earth, the more
matter rebels against form, i.e., the less—recalling what we discussed last time—the less
properties can be directly deduced from essence or form, the less a thing’s properties can be
deduced from its eternal essence and its form. [Pause]

Which is why Aristotle’s hierarchy is so interesting. I think what makes this hierarchy so
impressive are its criteria. At the top, there’s what he calls “noos,” or the prime mover. Indeed,
the prime mover is what determines the movement of the heavens, but it is pure intelligence,
form without matter. Then the stars are governed by intelligences. These intelligences are in turn
intelligible in relation to the prime mover. Thus, intelligence thinks itself in intelligible things.
Here we have a domain of pure forms. Forms which are such that they have no matter. Their
actuality is independent of all matter; they proceed independently of all matter, and their
properties immediately, necessarily follow from their essence. Right.

Now, heavenly bodies? The second rung of the hierarchy: heavenly bodies are steered by an
intelligence, they have matter; they have both form and matter. I’d go so far as to call it a light
matter. It’s a light matter. I stress “light,” because Aristotle approaches things in terms of light
and heavy, and we’ll see why; it will be his downfall. Ultimately, it’s a matter of preference,
since what terms will the Neoplatonists use in their approach? I’ll let you in on the secret of
Neoplatonism: they think in terms of “rare and dense,” not heavy and light. And because they no
longer think in terms of heavy and light, but instead rare and dense, everything changes.
Everything changes. They discover—this is for next time, I’m getting ahead of myself—they
uncover the qualitative movement of the soul rather than the local, extensive movement of the

                                                                                                   15

body—what am I saying?—not qualitative movement, they don’t uncover qualitative movement,
it’s a physical movement. They discover the “intensive” movement of the soul. The rare and the
dense.

But that’s not Aristotle. He does form a theory of intensity, but his theory of intensity falls apart.
That’s what the Neoplatonists are worried about. Just to give you an idea of how much it
changes. Well, I’m going with heavy and light, right, heavenly bodies have a light matter.
Meaning what? It means that they have, to borrow one of Aristotle’s more intriguing
expressions, they have a local matter. They have local matter. What does local matter mean? It
means matter actualized in local movement, by a pure change of position. Heavenly bodies have
a purely positional matter, a matter actualized purely and simply by changes in position. The
only matter belonging to heavenly bodies is local matter. [Pause] Therefore, their properties are
very closely tied to their essence, but not as immediately as with pure forms, see? Since they do
have matter, albeit light matter, there must be a cause… [Interruption of the recording] [1:44:43]

Part 3

… Did I get you, [Laughter] was it you? Oh, all my money? [Laughter] It wasn’t me? Oh, well,
then, likely story!

Thirdly. Are following along somewhat? You don’t want to understand too much, now!
[Laughter] Thirdly, think about the world of… You’re getting closer to the Earth. What do you
see? Now the bodies you can see, the heavenly bodies, aren’t swerving. It’s far away. What you
see are bodies rising and falling. Aristotle is great here. But he gets all this directly from Plato—
it’s quite different from Plato, but it’s also pretty close. It’s as complicated as it is beautiful!
Bodies rising and falling. That’s what you see, then. Yeah, smoke rises. And… and stones fall.
What is rising and falling? It’s so-called rectilinear motion. The closer we get to Earth, the way
we poor sublunar creatures move, see, it isn’t even curved anymore! In our atmosphere, things
fall and rise! We can’t call it a downgrade, just appreciate that it’s a new kind of matter. Bodies
subjected to this are a new kind of matter.

And what is it, exactly? It isn’t a local matter anymore. You saw his extraordinary definition for
local matter, which only refers to matter active on the basis of spatial position. For bodies rising
and falling, stones and smoke, it’s rather simple: it isn’t local motion, in fact. What does
rectilinear motion imply? Changes in state. [Pause] Which no longer implies a matter of local
change, but one of “alteration.” Why? Because a rising body is one that’s gotten lighter; a falling
body is one that’s gotten heavier. What does that entail? Certainly, it implies that there will be a
cycle, a cycle of qualities. According to Aristotle, the cycle of physical qualities is cold and hot,
dry and fluid. [Pause] Why does it rise? Fluid is what rises. It’s fluid, and moreover, hot fluid is
what rises. And cold and dry things descend. So, again, we need external causes. And we need
more and more of them. It ultimately points back to the movement of the stars, that is, the dry
and the fluid strictly depend on the fact that the sun moves away from and towards the earth.
Thus, there is an astronomical cause. There are other intervening causes. They multiply such that
I can move from the form of this body, subject to rectilinear motion, to its essential properties,
i.e., falling and rising. A multiplication of causes.

                                                                                                  16

In this case, I’d say that, however you look at it, the matter of alteration is much heavier than
purely local matter. Therefore its form and its essential properties are a lot more indirectly
connected, and the link between form and essential properties necessarily brings in outside
causes, more and more external causes. In Aristotle, that’s how it’s laid out. It was already that
way with Plato. Auxiliary causes, subaltern causes, and then Aristotle brilliantly adds his theory
of tyche. What is tyche? It means occasion, occasional causation, chance. It speaks to a lot of
things we’ve covered: from auxiliary causes to subaltern causes, to occasional causes, etc. All
these causal processes will pile up the closer we get to Earth, simply because the link between
form and matter, the link between essence and essential properties, becomes more and more
complicated and less and less direct.

And last, we get to the heaviest matter, the one we’re made of, sadly—we, living things. To wit,
for us, our form involves not just local matter, not just alterable matter, such as that of the
physical elements—physical elements are what have alterable matter, being fundamentally
alterable—for us, we, alas, are generable and corruptible. And this matter, the matter of
generation and corruption, is special; it will entail a series of causes, whereupon Aristotle will
brilliantly—it comes as no surprise—this is his foundation for everything that will come to be
known—no, yeah, more or less, I think—as “natural history.” Right. See, that’s good. So far, so
good.

If I wanted to, then—but I’m trying to hurry… That settles it, then. Each aberration in circular
motion, and see how such an aberration is rooted in circular motion itself, right, every aberration,
whereas circular motion subordinated itself to time, every aberration in circular motion unleashes
time and runs the risk of allowing time to overwhelm movement. We come back to the same
dramatic [pathétique] pattern. In my opinion, it’s even lovelier in philosophy than in cinema
because in philosophy, it’s even more dynamic. It’s a lot more dynamic. It’s much easier to
imagine. Cinema is too abstract for philosophy, you know? It’s funny, but… well, then, moving
right along. We haven’t seen the last of aberrations. And every time they show up on the scene,
we come back to this double aspect. How might we understand circular motion as a copy, the
likeness of a model? How might we go about it? How, at the same time, can we create an
aberration of uncontrolled movement that will overturn the relationship between movement and
time? [A noise] Ah! An aberration! [Laughter] I’ll quickly go down the list.

It’s inseparable from a political problem, a psycho-political problem, even. What happens in
Plato? Okay, “the just city” is the equivalent of a circular model. But there are aberrations,
accidental and yet inevitable causes, such that “the just city” is strictly speaking inseparable from
the problem of its decadence: it might be ideal, but it’s caught up in a process of decay, which is
fundamental to it. [Pause] The problem of souls: circular motion, a psychological problem, then.
I apologize for going so fast. We would need… I’d recommend reading Politics. How exactly
circular movement will be set up, and then how it will produce an aberration, there will be an
aberration such that time will drag the city into a process of decomposition. Right, that’s a
fundamental part of [Plato’s] political thought.

Thought, psychological thought—well, how should we approach this circular movement of
souls? A circular movement of souls along with the subordination of time? Well, in a way, it’s an
equilibrium. It shows up quite early with the Greeks, alongside theories of astronomy and

                                                                                                  17

physics: it’s an idea famously expressed by Anaximander, a pre-Socratic; the pre-Socratics were
6th – 5th century B.C. And Plato was 5th – 4th. The pre-Socratic, Anaximander, is famous for
saying—it’s been translated in different ways, and Heidegger offered such a dazzling
interpretation for it—basically: “beings compensate for each other…” They pay for each other,
beings “pay penance and [are] judged for their injustices, in accordance with the ordinance of
time.”6

Meaning what? Meaning that the circular movement of souls is something like a perpetual
process of compensating for imbalances. It’s basically: how do we keep aberrations at bay? And
that’s the problem, really. Circular motion is full of aberrations. How do you get rid of them?
How do you avoid aberrations? Well, there’s something that comes out of this circular law. What
comes out of it? Well, for instance, there’s the tragic hero, marked by their hubris, their excess.7
If time is what measures circular motion, right, the tragic hero represents excess. They emerge
from excess, they step out of circular motion, they perform outrageous acts. That needs to be
compensated for. Each one goes beyond measure, leaving a state of equilibrium. There must be
compensation. By compensating for imbalances, circular motion will be restored.

Now, this idea of compensating for imbalances was on everyone’s lips; it shows up, for example,
in Aeschylus’ tragedies, it’s there in the first great Greek tragedian, Aeschylus. It’s also in
Herodotus. It’s a Machiavellian idea; it’s a really beautiful notion. This compensation doesn’t
seem like much, but for them, it’s fate, it’s destiny, it’s humanity being provoked by the gods.
And they provoke us for one simple reason. They provoke us into getting out of balance. Why?
Again, wouldn’t that be revenge, payback? How does it happen? It's because oracles can never
be understood. A great historian picks up on this and devoted some great work to the subject:
Herodotus. [François] Châtelet did such a wonderful job of covering all this in his book, Birth of
History.8 [Pause] The oracle is, by nature, oblique. What they say cannot be understood my
human beings; which means, then, that the oracle is time. They represent pure time, as well as
time’s revenge. Humans can’t make heads or tails of it; they can only understand it afterwards.

And you find this Greek way of looking at things, if you know your literature, you find it come
back in Macbeth, through the witches, in a wonderful scene in Macbeth—it’s almost verbatim
Herodotus or Aeschylus, basically like, damned witch, always telling our futures in ways we
can’t understand. It’s not about how obscure the oracle is. That’s not it. It’s about the gods
laying traps. Macbeth is told that all will be well until the forest starts walking, until someone
comes along who isn’t born of a woman, and third—I don’t remember, anyway. He thinks,
alright, that means I’ll be fine. He lashes out at the witches in a magnificent, a magnificent
passage, one fit for the Greeks, fit for Greek tragedy, Aeschylus at least. He says, yeah, they did
it on purpose, this is how gods speak. They throw us off balance. They “themselves” pull us
away from [Pause] circular motion. As payback for wild time, now reasserting circularity,
compensation. Balance will be restored, blow for blow. Since the great circular movement is
always in jeopardy, it’s like the gods seem to use aberrations in movement as a way of restoring
balance. Is there another way out, seeing as how aberrations proliferate the closer we get to
Earth? There’s no other way.

But you can tell that’s not the end of the story, because, if we have to plug up aberrations in
movement every time, what’s to say wild time won’t undo everything? Indeed, before long, the

                                                                                                 18

Greeks no longer buy into the autocorrection of imbalances. They no longer believe that
aberrations in movement can be corrected for at every step, every time, blow for blow. And after
Herodotus comes the terrible Thucydides, who unfurls history as pure time, as wild time, as
untamed time. [Pause] It’s no longer an aberration in movement; Time has already been freed
from movement.

And after Aeschylus comes Sophocles, and Sophocles no longer believes in the compensation for
imbalances, that excess pays, or that beings “pay the penance and [are] judged for their injustices
in accordance with the ordinance of time”—time still as the measure for movement. No. What do
we find with Sophocles? What happens to Oedipus? We discover a time freed from movement,
and that’s the time Oedipus is working with. He won’t even be punished. Hence what Nietzsche
says, so splendidly, about Oedipus: it’s the most semitic Greek tragedy. Because time is no
longer a quantity of movement; it no longer measures circular motion. Quite the contrary. It is
time freed from movement, and movement now jogs along a timeline. And Oedipus wanders off
just like Cain in the Old Testament—hence the most semitic Greek tragedy. Cain, with the mark
of Cain, follows a path where no one can take him down, no one can demand he pay for his
crimes. The whole business with restoring balance is over.

We’ve entered a regime of Time where, literally, all we have are sequences of states further and
further from equilibrium. And that’s what will overturn, what will drag the Greek world, will…
It’s awful. I’d like to offer one last example before we wrap up. And this one isn’t mine, because
Eric Alliez is the one working through all these points. The way I see it, if he’s willing, I’d like
for him to step in a couple times after our break to talk about what happens with the
Neoplatonists, as well as a further aspect of Time I have to go over. But today, when it comes to
this next topic, which will be our last [for the day], if he would go over a few… [Deleuze doesn’t
finish his sentence].

The same thing is demonstrated, I mean, in Aristotle too, and that’s why we need Alliez to go
over it, because in his research he does the best job of showing… The same development playing
out at the level of economics. And it will be very important moving forward, especially for the
connection between Marx and Aristotle. Because there are basically two texts. I’ll briefly sum up
Alliez’s position before he goes into detail. Take a work by Aristotle called Nicomachean Ethics.
In the Nicomachean Ethics, you more or less get a theory of circular, compensatory exchange—
circular, compensatory exchange, which, using terms that have become popular since Marx, take
the form of C-M-C, i.e., money determining the equivalence of commodities. Why is that
necessary, I hear you ask? I think Alliez does a good job of demonstrating how, for Aristotle, this
power comes, not from labor time put into commodities, obviously, which was completely
equivalent to… but from need. From need. Right.

I could argue that the same thing happens economically, we find the same pattern: the
establishment of a circular movement, [Pause] the subordination of—What, time? Money?—
take your pick, it’s the same thing. And we’ll see in what sense, for Alliez, inevitably, things
build towards the idea that time is money. Time is money—it’s an economically founded
proposition, since that’s the whole idea behind credit and usury and profit, or what have you, of
surplus value—money is fundamentally the economic form of Time. Thus, we’re still dealing
with the same problem. So, you have money-or-time subordinated to movement and circular

                                                                                                19

motion, and the two are one. It’s because movement is circular—commodity-commodity—that
money is how we measure movement. It’s the quantity, literally, the amount of exchange that
makes up for any imbalances. We’re right back in the middle of... [Deleuze doesn’t finish his
sentence]

And so, Alliez says, listen! In a completely different work, not the Nicomachean Ethics, but, oh,
Christ, it’s called… [Someone gives him the title] The Politics, Aristotle discusses something
completely different, what he calls “chrematistics,” c-h-r-e-m-a, from the Greek, khrema—
chrematistics. And chrematistics is really strange because, at the same time, Aristotle says, it’s
inherently different from circular exchange, and yet it in a way it’s derived from the latter and
resembles it, and yet it tosses it out the window.

This is chrematistics. It corresponds to Marx’s formula, M-C-M—money-commodity-money.
What does this formula, M-C-M, mean? In other words, I buy a commodity, and I sell it. What
do I mean by that? I buy a commodity and sell it? It means that I buy it as cheaply as possible,
and I sell it at the highest price I can. Thus, M-C-M means M-C-M’—M’ being greater than M—
So, what’s going on here? Listen!

Circular exchange has been replaced by—what Alliez does so well to call, using a modern term,
unequal exchange. What is that? Why is it unequal? Precisely because it no longer forms a loop.
M-C-M is actually M-C-M’. In other words, it’s a straight line: M-M’-M’’—always growing,
further and further down the line, growing bigger and bigger. It will never be enough. I will
never buy cheaply enough, and my asking price will never be too high. M-C-M’, M’’, M’’’, etc.,
etc. What’s happening here? Time’s liberation from the movement of exchange. Now it’s the
exchange that’s become subordinate to Time, movement submitting to the march of time,
whereby time constantly produces something new, i.e., even more money. Always more money.

In what context does that happen, the development of chrematistics? Obviously, like I was
saying about the decadence of Greek cities—why is the Greek city bound to fall apart? This is all
wonderfully covered in Châtelet’s account. Athens, right—it was a democratic city, but at what
cost? It’s like America, just like America. America is a democracy, but at what cost?
Imperialism, a maritime empire, controlling the market, controlling the world market—that’s
Athenian democracy to a tee. We shouldn’t be too hard on the anti-democratic Greeks. We can’t
just say they’re a bunch of fascists. For some of the anti-democratic Greeks, they looked at
Athenian democracy, and well, what did they see? They saw imperialism, market control, naval
politics, maritime politics—you can’t just separate Athens from all that. And it’s in that context,
when Athens, thanks to the Persian Wars, came into its own an imperialist, maritime, mercantile
power, that this M-C-M’ formula takes shape.

I’d say the same thing here, then. It all gets confirmed in this last stage. See how the movement
of exchange, the circular economic movement of exchange produces its own aberration:
chrematistic movement, an aberration representing a sort of abyss in Time, literally, in the
proliferation of money—M – M’ – M’’. [Pause] And when it comes to chrematistics, it’s clear
that Time is freed from movement, at the same time as movement ceases to be circular. As a
result, it’s now movement that’s subordinate to Time. At which point, things look different, it’s
radically different; it won’t be the same movement.

                                                                                                  20

Alright, now I’d like for you to expand on that [Speaking to Éric Alliez]—I gave an outline for
you to elaborate on, going over any necessary nuances or even correcting anything if I’ve
forgotten anything essential. Speak up.

Éric Alliez: That’s more or less what I wanted to cover, in terms of what Aristotle calls
oikonomike, that is, the Marxist form of commodity-money-commodity, thus in the sphere of use
value, the sphere of need, which is something Marx gets from Aristotle. But effectively, the time
we’re dealing with is that of topology. [inaudible] becomes time as a unit of circular [inaudible]
movement. Where, at the level of the wild anomaly that is chrematistics, i.e., the form M-C-M’,
we’re no longer dealing with need but with profit, neither use value nor exchange value—
effectively, it was a form of time that was abstract, owing to a material form [inaudible] M’, M’’,
M'’’, and so on. So here we have two operative figures of time, [inaudible] which doesn’t
correspond to mathematics at all, since this second form, the form of abstract time, sort of
requires like a hint of this aberration in Aristotle’s text.

On the other hand, if we want to come to grips with the transition between the economic form,
oikonomike, to the chrematistic form, we see that, again, Time intervenes and then there’s some
kind of organicity in the exchange. Since, indeed, in the case of the former, where use value is
determined by need, the movement is straightforward: as Marx would say, it’s really a circuit,
i.e., C-M-C. We offer one commodity in order to buy another commodity, which, as use value, I
use for a purpose determined by my needs, Marx follows Aristotle in saying. What happens is
that, once there’s a discrepency between the two, then the vector of money’s movement gains an
autonomy, and we have to write [inaudible] differently: it’s no longer C-M-C; we have C-M and
then M-C, and obviously whoever has the money automatically takes over the whole process.
And immediately the whole process is flipped around, and we’ve reached M-C-M’.

Thus, Time has an extraordinary amount of power. I believe Aristotle [inaudible] in some of his
writings where he’s really ambiguous in how he describes the reserve function of money. So
[inaudible] we might mark out a new genealogy, i.e., the genealogy of the [inaudible] form. For
me, ultimately, the point of my work wasn’t to end up with a post-hoc chrematistics on a form of
abstract time, i.e., a time that isn’t subordinate to…

Deleuze: For those who haven’t studied Greek, remind us of what chréma means.

Alliez: So, chréma, simply means wealth or property. Thus, “chrematistics” effectively describes
an exchange where the goal is to make a profit [remark unclear]. And so here, even at this level,
we’d get two forms of Time. What’s more, things get more complicated, because I’d juxtapose,
on one hand, movement… time, sorry, time defined as a quantity of movement alongside how
Aristotle describes mneme. In his Ethics, he says that mneme stands in for [inaudible]. Well, I
don’t think Aristotle would have a problem with saying that mneme is a quantity of need. Thus,
we’d end up with this double sequence…

Deleuze: Need itself being a product of circular motion.

Alliez: Exactly.

                                                                                                   21

Deleuze: Which shows up all the time in Aristotle, even with his physics, since need is a final
cause. The system of final causes—it’s inseparable from final causes, so need is indeed love of
the good.

Alliez: That’s why Aristotle relates oikonomike, the first form, to the practice of [inaudible]
practice.

Deleuze: So, on that front, you and I are on the same page. We ought to say, “time is money” in
an extremely rigorous sense, i.e., that time is the unit of measurement for the movement
represented by the exchange of goods as dictated by need. Alright.

Alliez: So, on the one hand, in Nicomachean Ethics, we have this definition of money as…and
I’d argue you could link it in particular to the definition of time from Aristotle’s famous treatise,
Politika. Where, in The Politics, Aristotle attempts a sort of genealogy of the money form. And
you can see how things start to get complicated, because he’s forced to bring in a movement,
what from a modern perspective we’d call international trade, in concrete terms, trade from
outside the city. Which raises a problem, then, since he says that such trade, within the
framework of this trade, we’re no longer framing things in terms of needs. What we’re really
looking at is a system of negative interrelations.

Deleuze: And imperialism.

Alliez: And imperialism. So, you get the feeling that this money, which was supposed to emerge
from a non-chrematistic form, since it was placed along the horizon of need, we also know how
important need was for Aristotle, because for him, the polis itself is formed by need. Thus, in this
genealogy of money, you get the sense that things are desperately veering towards chrematistics.
That is, it’s from chrematistics that [inaudible].

Deleuze: From the perspective of a world market.

Alliez: That’s right. It is more [inaudible] that the market is absent from the polis [remarks
unclear].

Deleuze: All of this lines up with what we’ve been saying. It’s obvious that this new time, time
freed from movement, is a world time. It’ll be a world time. Sorry…

Alliez: Yes, so, in fact, it’s with chrematistics where we effectively see the beginning of money,
of the money form. Which leads us to something rather unusual that… When we read Marx’s
commentary [inaudible], he read very, very carefully, whether we’re talking about the
Grundrisse, of whether it’s [inaudible] or we’re talking about Capital, there’s a phrase that
comes up again and again, the same way of describing the movement of law, equivalence—but
he hesitates, he hesitates because he’s arguing that equivalence is formed by money. What I’ll
demonstrate is that labor value, the substance of labor is what’s behind the equivalence. Thus,
there’s this famous hesitation. I think that if we read the text carefully [inaudible], Aristotle’s
hesitation is tied to his historical economic situation, where despite there already being a

                                                                                                     22

monetary form, things still function on the horizon of use value. I believe that this poses a real
problem, one of use value.

Deleuze: In other words, his hesitation is absolutely not about asking: Does money, as an
equivalent standard, refer back to needs, or does it refer back to something else, i.e., labor time?
The Marxist solution. His hesitation is over the two forms of money, because as Marx tells us,
there’s no need for him to hesitate since he’s had labor time there from the beginning, which
results in a homogeneous time. What I’d like for you all to take away from what Marx says, is
how we get to the idea that untamed time is abstract time; it is abstract. And we’re already
equipped to appreciate how this abstract Time implies two things. It implies a homogeneous
Time running in a straight line instead of passing through privileged positions, i.e., one whose
moments are all equal. [Pause] There’s that. We talked about the solstice-equinox sort of
privileged positions. That was a rural Time. Urban time no longer has any… there are no more
seasons, you know? There aren’t any seasons. Well and good. Ultimately, that’s not what’s
important about abstract time. Abstract time is uniform and homogeneous; that’s the sense in
which it is abstract. Each one of its moments is like any other.

But, the second meaning of the word, “abstract,” implies that it’s “abstracted from movement,”
that it’s no longer a quantity of movement. At which point, it’s what is concrete. How’s that?
Insofar as Time is a quantity of movement, it is abstract. It’s a number, a measurement.
Movement was what it measured, so [movement] was what was concrete. But when [time]
becomes “abstract”—in quotation marks? It no longer measures movement, and once it no longer
measures movement, it’s been abstracted from movement. But when it’s abstracted from
movement, Time is now the concrete reality. And so, “abstract Time emerges” is a way of saying
that “the concrete reality of Time emerges.” You see, by virtue of both meanings of the word,
“abstract.” From there we can cheerfully conclude by saying: the abstract is the concrete,
[Laughter] but in this case it’s the verb, strictly speaking, right?

Anything you’d like to add? I think your overview is really great; it’s very clear. I’d like for you
to elaborate, for us to hang onto, since you’ve gotten it, because when we get to modern times,
starting with the discovery of an abstract Time, how will we situate it? For that, we’ll have to
come back to Aristotle.

Alliez: Yes, because, in fact, there’s at least one question [inaudible]. It seems like there’s yet
another, third figure of time that shows up; at least, it’s the form of abstract Time that, instead of
splitting, becomes a [inaudible] figure.

Deleuze: It’s quite interesting, with usury, because I’ll need you again when we get back. Maybe
with the other aspect, time and the soul, we’ll get to the bottom of usury, and then, if you’re
willing—I don’t know anything about the Aristotelian understanding of usury—you can tie that
back to Aristotle. The main problem with usury is its relationship to the soul, and that will be
Time as well—wholly a question of time.

Alliez: Yes, because this Time [inaudible] access to this powerlessness will be determined by
some future subjectivation, even appropriation.

                                                                                                                    23

Deleuze: Which would constitute a third form… which is neither time as quantity of movement,
nor the now independent, homogeneous time, but a third…

Alliez: What we could refer to as “power,” with all the extraordinary ambiguity that word
entails, because if you understand “power” in an Aristotelian way, that obviously takes us
back…9

Deleuze: Back to the first form [of time], right, yes, yes.

Alliez: …if, with Bergson, we’re just dealing with creation-time and invention-time, we won’t
run into the problem of…

Deleuze: Of usury, which would be, like, invention-time… Yeah. The way I see it, then, that will
lead straight into the part where we’ll go over Platonism, and St. Augustine. There we go!

A student: [Inaudible]

Deleuze: You’ll talk it over. Anyway, see you on the 28th! [End of the session] [2:28:10]

Notes

  Cross-referencing the French translation of Sein und Zeit, it proved difficult to track down these exact phrases. For
readers consulting Heidegger’s text, the above translation reflects Deleuze’s wording and does not correspond to any
particular passage—however, he is likely referring to a handful of passages in 16-17, following the German
pagination.
  See Mircea Eliade, Le mythe de l’éternel retour (Paris: Gallimard, 1949; 1969).
  Jean-Pierre Vernant, Les Origines de la pensée Grecque (Paris: CNRS, 1962).
  The etymology of Cronos’ name is controversial.
  Deleuze says that the demiurge has “erased” myth—écrasé. This could be a play on words, since he suggested in
his above etymology for “Cronos” that the root for the latter, craino (to accomplish), leads to cras. Thus, the
demiurge has é-crasé—“un-accomplished”—what myth had accomplished.
  Following the translation of Anaximander as it appears in Friedrich Nietzsche, Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the
Greeks, translated by Marianne Cowan (Regnery: Washington, D.C., 1962), p. 45.
  Original: “…frappé par l’hybris, par la démesure.” In what follows, démesure is translated either as “excess” or
“outrage,” bearing in mind that—although it’s been retroactively analyzed as out + rage—the latter refers to an
excess, a transgression, stepping out of bounds, etc. The reader should note the use of démesure alongside frequent
descriptions of time as a mésure of movement.
  François Châtelet, Naissance de l’histoire (Paris: Minuit, 1961).
  “Power” here is puissance and not pouvoir, for any reader tracking the distinction.