Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema and Thought, 1984-1985

Lecture 16, 19 March 1985 (Cinema Course 82)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Nadia Ouis (part 1), Savino Claudio Reggente (part
2) and Léa Machillot (part 3); additional revisions to transcription and time-stamp,
Charles J. Stivale

Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1

... Has anyone read an American author by the name of [Erving] Goffman? Yes? And do you
know him well? No? Well, that's what I wanted to know.

So, as you'll remember, last time we developed our three points regarding semiocritique, or
linguistically-inspired semiology. These three points were: firstly, the fact of cinema being
defined as narrative, the fact of narration. The second point was the cinematographic image
presented as analogical or iconic, and as the equivalent of an iconic or analogical statement.
And the third point was the language structure that codified the analogical image or the
analogical statement, a language structure consisting above all of syntagmatics, that is to say
syntagmatic rules. These were the three points, the three basic points.

But I would say, given that the semioticians of this school write complicated texts, well, it's a
good idea for us to clarify, and to keep in mind – if our previous analyses were correct – to
keep to these three points, because, once again, it's these three basic points that constitute our
problem. After that there's nothing more to say. If we grant them these three points, then
they're right, they're right in doing what they're doing. And if we don't grant them those three
points, they're still right. But if we don't grant them those three points, it's up to us to do
something else. So, should we go back to these three points, or do you have anything to add?
You don't have anything to add?

Student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: So, today’s not going to be one of my lucky days... you okay with that?

Student: Yes.

Deleuze: Right. I'll tell you how I feel about these three points. And last time… I already
spoke about the first one, but I'd like to repeat what I said so that it’s very clear. They say that
it's a fact that cinema was constituted… it's a historical fact that cinema was constituted by
Hollywood as narrative cinema and, by doing so, it marginalized other forms that were
logically possible in cinema and which, from then on, would appear in a marginal form or, if
you prefer, would appear as experimental cinema. Experimental cinema meaning a type of
cinema marginalized by the constitution of a dominant narrative cinema.

Well, I say to myself, this is very strange, because, once again, this is what's got my spirit in
such a state of turmoil: we've completely bracketed out what seems to me to be the given, the
immediate given, in the Bergsonian sense of the world, the immediate given of the
cinematographic image, namely movement. And indeed, I remind you of the texts by
[Christian] Metz where, when it comes to distinguishing the cinematographic image from the
photographic image, he tells us that the photographic image is not narrative. He doesn't say
that the cinematographic [here Deleuze obviously means to say “photographic”] image is
motionless. He says that it is not narrative, whereas the cinematographic image is narrative.

When I say that I feel a certain astonishment, all I mean is that it's rather odd to affirm that
the cinematographic image is narrative, instead of saying that the cinematographic image
moves, and moves in itself, that is to say, is automatic. And this suspension, this bracketing
of movement, I insist, is an explicit claim of the semiocritics. So, they're unequivocal in this
respect. But there's something that bothers me greatly, because if they explicitly claim to
suspend movement, this will lead to a certain appreciation of the cinematographic image in
terms of the photogram, the still frame. And we've seen how, in the end, this was in line with
[Roland] Barthes’ thinking, but I think that Barthes meant something else by it. And even
[Umberto] Eco, in the Communications article I quoted,1 ends his article with an ode to the
photogram. Why is this odd? Because any emphasis on the photogram in the cinematographic
image fundamentally belongs to the experimental cinema we've just rejected, or
marginalized. In fact, what turns the photogram into a shot – the famous photogram shot, the
still image shot – is fundamentally a creation of this non-narrative cinema, which presents
itself as experimental cinema. Indeed, the photogram is obviously not a narrative given. So,
you see, all this is rather awkward.

Another way of saying what I find annoying or what bothers me: semiocritique, it seems to
me, tells us two things at once. But that's not a problem, they're not contradictory. It's that, at
the same time, narration is an apparent given of images, a manifest given of images, even if it
was historically acquired, historically acquired since it was acquired by narrative cinema as
Hollywood created it. So, we're told that narration is an apparent given of images – remember
Metz's bizarre formula according to which to pass from one image to another is already a fact
of language. I would say, this is weird because one would expect that moving from one image
to another is a question of movement. No. Moving from one image to another is a fact of
language. So, from the point of view of semiocritique, narration is an immediate given of
cinematographic images, and at the same time, which is not opposed, it's an effect of deep
structure.

What is deep structure? As we've seen, this is our third point, namely syntagmatics, the
syntagms that precisely define the linguistic structure to which images are subject. Now,
there's no contradiction in saying that narration is the apparent given of images, and that it's
the effect, in images, of a deeper structure, a linguistic structure… But I would say, well, for
me, for me, I don't see any... vanity aside, it's just for convenience, to separate things.

The first thing that bothers me is that, in my view, narrative is never an immediate or
apparent given of images, any more than it is the effect of an underlying structure. But what's
very different for me is that it can only be a consequence of the immediate or apparent givens
of the image. It is, I would say, neither an apparent given, nor the effect of an underlying
language structure. It is a consequence of the apparent images as they are in and of
themselves. It has never been possible to define a painting as figurative. Whether painting is
figurative or not, the immediate givens of painting have never been figurative. Whether

cinema is narrative or not, narration has never constituted the immediate givens of the image.
Narration derives from it. Derives from what? It doesn't derive from a deep structure to which
the images refer. It derives from the immediate and apparent character of the cinematographic
image, insofar as the immediate and apparent character – the immediate given of the
cinematographic image – is movement. A narrative cinema exists because images move in
and for themselves. Narration derives from this. It stems from the immediacy of images. It is
not the immediate given of the images, nor does it derive from a deep structure.

What does this mean? And how does narration derive from the immediate givens of the
cinematographic image as movement-image? As I was saying, as I was reminding you,
because this alludes – once again, we've been working on the cinematographic image for
three years now – I'm alluding to things that we've already looked at, so that I… I'm
summarizing for those who weren't there. The movement-image implies intervals of
movement. The immediate given of the image is movement as related to intervals of
movement. Note that I don't grant, you see… I don't grant myself anything narrative.
Movements related to intervals of movement, there's nothing narrative about that.

I would say, if you relate a movement to an interval of movement, if you relate movements to
an interval of movement, you obtain three images, three types of image. I won't come back to
that, and for those who weren't there, you'll have to forgive me. You get three types of image,
which will be three types of movement-image. The three types of movement-image are the
types of images you get when you relate movement to an interval of movement. And these
are the perception-image, the action-image and the affection-image. These are the three kinds
of movement-image, the three main types of movement-image. What do we mean by this?
Well, if you relate movement to an interval of movement, you have the movement-image
insofar as it acts upon the interval, it's a perception-image. When the movement-image
reacts, this is the action-image. And when we have what fills the interval of movement, this
is the affection-image.

So... this is my interval of movement. You see, here… this is movement, insofar as it acts
upon the interval… perception-image. Insofar as there is a reaction beyond the interval, that's
the action-image. And between the two is the affection-image, in other words, everything that
fills the interval itself. We've covered all this in detail. I'd say that the three types of image
represent the specification of the movement-image in its relation with the interval of
movement. Okay.

What do I call narration? What do we call a narrative? I call narration any combination of
perception-image, affection-image and action-image in accordance with the laws of a
sensory-motor schema. What is a sensory-motor schema? A sensory-motor pattern is
movement in relation to the interval of movement. In fact, a sensory-motor pattern is when a
reaction delays an action undergone, when an executed reaction delays an action undergone.
The action undergone... [Recording interrupted; 18:54]

... your eye… it's springtime, a ray of sunlight hits your eye… it's a movement, a perceptionimage. You see, you are an interval of movement. You are nothing else. In other words, you
are a pure gap. You are a gap. You are an interval of movement. The sunbeam, the luminous
movement, strikes your eye. Perception, the first type of movement-image. As you are a gap,
you are not a thing. A thing is a place where movement passes through without a gap. So, you
take time, and I suppose, you do this… you turn your head. You do like this.

Or on the contrary, especially if you're a vampire, you do like this instead. And if you're a
naturalist... whatever you do, and however long it takes you to choose whether you're a
vampire or a naturalist, it takes time… to do this or do that. This is what we will call an
action-image. It's an action. An action is when you react to perception, after a certain amount
of time. The sensory-motor pattern is the whole. And what happens in between? The
affection-image, which is a movement that turns on itself, fills the gap. Namely, in the case of
the vampire, a feeling of horror rises within him: “Sun, I hate you! I hate you!” This is an
affection-image. Or, “I love you, oh sun!” Two great poems in French literature have taken
up both positions. A well-known poem by Edmond Rostand and a lesser-known, but even
more beautiful, by Barbey d'Aurevilly, “I Hate you Sun…”2

Well, all this to say... narration isn't complicated, cinematographic narration, because
obviously... The advantage of what I'm saying here, of all this nonsense, is that it provides a
criterion for cinematographic narration. My definition doesn't apply to narration of any other
kind, for example, in novels. I call cinematographic narration any regulated combination of
perception-image, action-image and affection-image, regulated by the law of one or more
sensory-motor schemas.

And indeed, what is this famous Hollywood cinema, the fact of narration that semiocritique
invokes? It's the regulated passages, the regulated combinations of perception-image, actionimage, affection-image. Take any western, for example, and that’s what you have. Take a
detective film, take anything you like, it presents us with action-images in variable orders,
and according to this or that aspect of a sensory-motor schema. It presents us with
distributions of perception-images. The typical perception-image: up on the hill, the Indians
appear out of nowhere. It's the Indians, the perception-image. Fear rises in the encampment,
or the surge of courage: the affection-image. Reaction: Bang, bang, bang! This is narration.

I'm saying something simple here: narration depends directly on the specification of the
movement-image. I call specification, or the process of specification, the process by which
the movement-image gives rise to three main types of image: perception-image, affectionimage, action-image. It is in this sense that I say that narration is in no way an immediate
given of the image: it derives from it. And just as it is not an immediate given of the image, it
is not the effect of a linguistic structure that it presupposes. At this level, I see absolutely
nothing in terms of a language structure. I see a regulated composition of the three types of
image that have specified themselves independently of any language structure. That was my
first point, which responds to the first thesis of semiocritique.

For this first point, I'd like to add that, as you'll recall, the semiocritics were confronted with
the existence, since the war, of a kind of cinema that was no longer narrative, but
dysnarrative, the prime example of which was the cinema of [Alain] Robbe-Grillet. And the
semiocritics response was to tell us: That's not a problem, we can explain it by assuming
something of the order of a structural mutation. Instead of the narrative image – because for
them, the image is narrative – instead of the narrative image referring to a syntagmatic
structure, a structural mutation has taken place and, as we've seen, the image now refers to a
structure that is prevalently paradigmatic rather than syntagmatic. And this is enough to
produce so-called dysnarrative effects. In contrast, in classical cinema, the structure was
syntagmatic. But I won't come back to that, unless it's necessary… but it's not.

In the same way, if I try to define my position, I'd say, No, there's no structural mutation here
either. There's a fundamental phenomenon that, for me, defined post-war cinema. Namely,

instead of the image being a movement-image, where movement defined the immediate
given, instead of the image being a movement-image, with a representation of time indirectly
deriving from it – in classical cinema, in fact, you have an indirect movement-image that is
the representation of time deriving from it – well, the great post-war mutation is that the
image becomes a direct presentation of time. In other words, it's a direct time-image, no
longer a movement-image from which an indirect representation of time would derive.

We tried to analyze this direct time-image in detail last year. That's why, for those who
weren't there, this may seem a little vague, but never mind. And we found it in several forms.
The direct time-image, in any case, opposed itself, and became a time-image… that is to say
it broke with the empirical form of time. The empirical form of time, I remind you, is
succession, the succession of moments, or the succession of presents. This is what we call the
“course of time”. A direct presentation of time is of an entirely different nature.

And we found it in two ways: when time constitutes a series, and no longer a course, namely
when the before and after become qualities of time, and no longer relative positions of
moments… when the before and after become qualities, that is to say when a series of time is
constituted in the form: I become another. We've seen that this was the basis of serial cinema
in, for example, Perrault's films. Pierre Perrault's great formula was: the flagrant offence of
making up legends. Catching someone in the act of making up legends, here we have the
before and after, which have become qualities of time. I become another, whose purest
expression can be found in the cinema of [Jean] Rouch. But we've seen that in a cinema that
claims to be more traditional… the entire cinema of [Jean-Luc] Godard was a construction of
a series in which time is vectorized, according to which the before and after become qualities
of time, with each sequence of images tending towards a limit that determines the before and
after in the series. This was a case of the direct representation of time: the time series.

And then, last year, we saw another case, no longer the time series but the set of time, which
was the second direct presentation of time. And the set of time... no, sorry, the order of time –
the set of time is too ambiguous – the order of time… what is the order of time? This time,
it's no longer a question of the before and after of the series, it implies the coexistence of all
time relations. The order of time is the coexistence of time relations. What does this mean?
We looked at it last year, I won't come back to it now because I don't have time, and it's not...
We saw it last year in two forms. There were two forms of the order of time: on the one hand,
the coexistence of internal presents, namely the discovery that there was a present of the
present, a present of the past and a present of the future. And that while past, present and
future succeeded one another, on the other hand, the present of the present, the present of the
past and the present of the future coexisted, and this was the direct presentation of time. For
example, in Robbe-Grillet's work, where we have the simultaneity of peaks of present.3

Or another aspect: the coexistence of sheets of past, which also defines, which is another way
of defining the order of time, namely the coexistence of time relations. The coexistence of
sheets of past, an obvious example that we find much more… this time not in Robbe-Grillet,
but in [Alain] Resnais. As I was saying, in their collaborative work… what happens in Last
Year at Marienbad [1961]? Well, suppose we have a sheet of past where two characters meet:
one settles on a sheet of past where they haven’t yet met the other, the other settles on a sheet
of the past where they have already met the other. It can happen. You and I know each other.
You can settle on a sheet of the past where you already know me. But me, at the same time,
I'm settling on a sheet of the past where I don't yet know you. What will that give us? Well, it
will give us Last Year at Marienbad.

So, maybe that's the structure of time in Last Year at Marienbad. Why would that be?
Because from then on, all Resnais's work would confirm it: all the time, all the time, the
theme of a profound coexistence between sheets of past, variable sheets of past, appears. And
last year, for those of you who were there, we went looking for a mathematical law for this
coexistence. And we found it in something that really interested us: the transformation of the
sheets, the baker’s transformation.4

In this very strange mathematical operation, the baker's transformation, which is exactly the
operation the baker performs when he stretches a surface, when he stretches a square of... the
thing flattened there, kneading dough for I don't know what… and then each time redoing,
cutting in two, redoing, superimposing and so on... What varies is that, from one
transformation to another, you have a new distribution of points, so that the points which are
contiguous at one stage of the operation will, on the contrary, be distant, on the sheet, at
another stage of the operation. If you take all these sheets together, if you assume that they
are coexistent, you'll have a generalized coexistence of sheets of past which, in effect, defines
a whole order of time, since these transformations take place according to a certain order. But
there's a sheet where the two characters are far apart, and a sheet where they're closer
together. There are no two points on the sheet that, at certain levels of the transformation, will
not be one pressed against the other and, at another level of the transformation, be more or
less distant.

So, I would say, it doesn't matter, this is just for... it's not so that you understand… those who
were here have already understood, whereas those who weren't there won’t understand what
I'm talking about. It's just to emphasize this, the hypothesis that cinema may in a way have
broken with the movement-image. When did it break with the movement-image? I've been
saying this for so long now, and have repeated it so many times... it seems to me that the
founding act of modern cinema is the collapse of the sensory-motor schema. Okay.

It's not something that happened in language. It's not a question of structural or linguistic
mutations. It's something much more alive. It's when we learned that we no longer had many
ways of reacting to situations in this world, and this was the discovery of Neorealism. It was
the incredible discovery of Neorealism, which was never a lesson in passivity, because it
redistributed all the givens. If we can't act, if we're incapable of reacting to situations in the
world because they've become too great for us, what can we do? What can we do? Well, and
this the beginning of this cinema of the seer, this cinema of denunciation, of the mark of
Neorealism, this cinema of clairvoyance. But it all started from a collapse of the sensorymotor schema, and with this the cinematographic image abandoned the movement-image, it
abandoned movement as an immediate given.

Of course, it continued to move, but that was no longer the point. What was essential was
that, instead of time depending on movement, it was movement that now depended on time.
In other words, what had become essential in the cinematographic image was the fact that it
was a direct time-image, and no longer an immediate movement-image. It was a direct timeimage. Well, it's when the cinematographic image becomes a direct time-image, either in the
form of the series, or in the form of the relation, the relation of time... no, sorry, of the order
of time… or in the form of the order of time, that what appears is this immediate
characteristic, this new immediate characteristic of the image, this dysnarration that
semiocritique speaks of. I thought this would all be quite clear, but it's not at all, I have the
feeling... but it doesn't matter. Is everything all right? All good? Okay. So, I'll quickly move
on to the second point.

I suppose, then... You're completely free, I mean, it's like a choice I'm offering you. You see,
I've tried to explain as honestly as I can the point of view, the first point of view of
semiocritique. This is where I always make appeal to what you need, or what suits you. If
there are any of you saying to yourselves, this is what suits me… well, just go for it, I'm not
going to stop you. Go ahead. I've just said why it doesn't suit me but... and why I want to go
in another direction, and I tried to explain in what other direction I want to go.

Once again, if I once more summarize the immediate givens of the cinematographic image,
it's sometimes movement, sometimes time. Narration or dysnarration derives from these
immediate givens. And I need – grant me – I need to call upon… a process of specification of
the movement-image or the emergence of the time-image, but what I don't need is to call
upon anything either closely or remotely related to language or to a language system. Indeed,
there is a specification of the movement-image. For example, in the three images I've
indicated – perception, action, affection – it's a question of... of a typology of movement that
refers to absolutely nothing, nothing, nothing, language related. Because I'll tell you at the
end – I haven’t yet said this – what this whole thing is about. Which brings us to the second
point.

You see, it's funny, we're always wrong. When I plan our sessions, I say to myself, Oh, this is
going to be very clear, this is going to be fine, and the other things will be difficult, etc. And
I'm wrong every time, every time. What I think should be very clear suddenly becomes very,
very confusing. Whereas what I think will be difficult... well, at least I hope so! So far, I've
only had the first experience.

Second point, the question of the analogical statement. The cinematographic image would be
a statement... Yes?

A student: [Inaudible question]

Deleuze: Pierre Perrault? Perrault is a great Quebecois filmmaker who is generally grouped
under the category of “direct cinema”, which is a very, very bad category. He himself calls it
“cinema of the lived”, or lived cinema… no, actually, he calls it “cinema of the lived”, and
that's the honest truth of it. And in previous sessions, we looked at some of Perrault's films. I
mean, I think he's one of the most important filmmakers today. And I'd likened him to Rouch,
because they have something in common: he believes that what is mistakenly called “direct
cinema” is not a cinema that captures lived experience, but one that captures the moment
when someone passes from a given state to a completely different state on which they
fabulate. And that's what constitutes the series. That's why he rejects all pre-established
fiction. He rejects all pre-established fiction… not at all – remember this – not at all because
fiction should be eliminated, but because fiction must be caught red handed, namely when it's
a real character who starts fictionalizing.5

There is a whole group of filmmakers… because also American directors… if you take
Shirley Clarke, for example.6 Shirley Clarke, that's obvious… Her great work, which
concerns an eccentric black guy… it’s a great, great work, called, I think, Portrait of Jason
[1967]… who is this fabulous person who never ceases to pass from the character he is to the
fabulation he's creating. And it's not a matter of giving oneself a pre-established fiction, but
of capturing the flagrant offence of producing a fiction, the flagrant offence of fabulation.
Perrault says, What interests me is when the Native American is caught in the act of
fabulating… if the fiction comes from me, it's no good. But why? Because it's the master's

discourse. And no matter how hard I try and put myself on the Indians' side and do my
utmost, it's always the master's discourse. It will always be the colonizer's discourse.

But true cinema – and this is where Perrault thinks he can attain a truly political cinema – is
precisely when real people exercise their power of fabulation. And the power of fabulation,
you see, is always possible. It's not at all lies, or mythomania… of course, it can lean towards
that... In Portrait of Jason, Shirley Clarke's admirable film... Jason is a complete
mythomaniac, but he's much more than that, he does much more than that. The power of
fabulation is the power by which a collectivity invents itself as a people. That's why it's
political cinema. Godard's films too will be political, but for reasons other than the selfinvention of a people. But with Perrault, this is obviously what’s happening. When the Indian
is caught red-handed in the act of fabulation, that's the moment… in fact, he always responds
to the objection: Come on, you've never been a nation! Because the act of fabulation is
precisely the process by which a nation is created.

So, I'd say... how to put it... there are poles, it's very, very subtle… it's up to you to correct
each time. There's a pole where fabulation looks like a simple mystification, as in Portrait of
Jason, the black guy who tells... and ultimately, he’s conning us. Just as in [Orson] Welles' F
for Fake [1973], as we saw when we analyzed this strange film by Welles, which constituted
a series.7 What we called a series organized under the powers of the false, given that the
powers of the false is always multiple and that it refers from one degree, to another degree, to
yet another degree, so that there's always a forger of another forger of another forger, and so
on. So that's one extreme pole of the power of fabulation. And the other extreme pole of the
power of fabulation is the political constitution of a people.

And this perpetually goes from one pole to the other. It goes from one to the other, in a way,
so that you don't really know where you are anymore. Take Jean Rouch's Moi, un noir
[1958], where it's precisely the same thing, which is why I always compare Perrault to Jean
Rouch, even though their techniques are very, very different. What is the film about? You
have these black guys who practice their trade, and then transform themselves according to
the needs of a ritual. Or black people who are unemployed, or prostitutes, and then go on to
live the lives of federal agents or Hollywood movie stars. In Moi un Noir, it's a matter of “I
become another”. This is fabulation. You find the two poles. You can take it at the level of
the pole which is already fully satisfying, and which is very interesting, namely, they create
their own scene. They create their own scene. They say, we don’t accept this. They think...
you have the prostitute, the black prostitute who thinks she's Dorothy Lamour… well, that’s
what you have, it can’t be suppressed, it's even what makes you laugh, otherwise the situation
wouldn't be funny. But there's something else too, and that's the way they constitute
themselves as a people. Why do they constitute themselves as a people? You feel that there's
already a kind of strange role reversal going on. The power of fabulation is the response to
the question: Where is the people? The people are missing.

As I was saying, this is the big difference between pre-war political cinema, since we're
always looking for differences between... and post-war political cinema. Pre-war political
cinema is marked by Soviet cinema. But Soviet cinema, even if it has its doubts, even if it
already has doubts, there's one thing it can't say, or even suggest, and that's that the people
are missing. It can't do that. Political cinema, the great Soviet political cinema, is a cinema
where the people are there! That is to say, they act, they are there, even if they are unaware of
it. Take someone like [Vsevolod] Pudovkin: all his cinema concerns a people becoming
aware of itself, and in any case, the people are there.

Post-war cinema represents the collapse of the sensory-motor schema. The people are
missing. There are no more peoples. There are no more in Europe, and not yet in the Third
World. There are none left in Europe, and not yet in Africa. The colonial divisions have been
maintained. How can there be a people, since we've been careful not to give them any
possibility of forming a people? So, the people are missing. It will be a case of either the
people not being there anymore, or of the people not yet being there. This was to be the great
post-war awakening. The great Soviet cinema, the great Soviet political cinema, is no longer
possible. It has lost none of its value, none of its beauty, including its political force. It hasn't
lost anything, but there's no point in remaking it. In the same sense that Robbe-Grillet says
that there’s no longer any point in remaking novels in the style of Balzac. Balzac is enough
for us. It's not Balzac who has aged. Who has aged are those who write novels like Balzac.
Balzac hasn't aged. Eisenstein, Pudovkin, Dovzhenko, they haven't aged. You see, there's no
point in making political films that show us an existing people. There's no point, because it
doesn't serve any purpose. So, as I was saying, political cinema migrates to the Third World.
But what does this mean? It migrates to conditions where the people are missing.

Once again, take the problem of the – for those who would like to... I’m digressing, oh la la!
– Take the question of the Palestinian people. The Palestinian people, their story isn’t
complicated. Israel has never wanted to talk about the Palestinians. For them, there is no such
thing as a Palestinian people. So, Israel has always spoken of “Arabs from Palestine”. It's
very interesting, because if you like, it means that all languages are coded. Diplomatic
language above all is coded. Proust showed it wonderfully in those definitive pages, when a
diplomat says that it’s a nice day, you have to know what this means. Well, when diplomats
say “Arabs from Palestine”, it's clear what this means. It means that there are no Palestinians.
There are Arabs who were in Palestine, but they're not Palestinians. It's easy to see why Israel
needs this formula.

And one thing is certain, there was no Palestinian nation. There was no Palestinian state.
There was no Palestinian nation. The “Palestinians”, or the “Arabs from Palestine”, were a
quite different entity. They were completely different from other Arabs, they had their own
traditions, they had their own lineage, they had their own chieftaincy, they had everything
you could imagine, and they were part of a land crushed by the Turks. So, what is the
Palestinian question? It's the way the Palestinians have constituted themselves as a people.
How did they do it? By fighting, in a struggle. In a way, the Israelis are not wrong in saying
there was no Palestinian people. But the moment they say that, it's enough for them to say it
for one to begin to emerge, which is precisely to fight against Israel's expulsion of the Arabs
from Palestine.

At that point, the Palestinian people was born. What name do we give to this? In a way, it's
fabulation. What I call fabulation, in this sense, you see, is the act by which something that
did not yet exist is constituted. Precisely insofar as there was no Palestinian people, the
constitution of the Palestinian people is a veritable act of political fabulation. But I know of
no people who, historically, have not constituted themselves through such fabulations.

And it’s not a question of going back to the old myths. On the contrary, these are very
practical acts. How do African peoples constitute themselves today? And in what form?
Rouch's answer is, through a series of acts of fabulation… and what is he trying to do? To
create history for us in his own cinema, through the way such and such person of color slips
into such and such a role, which can refer to a role with an American name... Think of
Rouch's film A Lion Called the American [1968] for example, where the lion – it's about lion

hunters – is called the American. That's the act of fabulation. It's very funny! We'd have to
analyze this short film in detail, this very beautiful film. It's a fundamentally political act of
fabulation, which very strangely will enable the group of lion hunters to constitute themselves
as a people. I exaggerate a little here… I'm exaggerating, but I'm hardly exaggerating. There
was the baptism, the completely fabulist baptism: the lion, the American.

Now, in Moi, un noir, it's the same thing. The young prostitute who says: Moi, Dorothy
Lamour. Or the other one who says: I am… I'm the big federal agent – I mean the
unemployed guy. And this whole scene that they make for themselves. That's what I'm
saying, what's so great about this cinema wrongly called “direct”, is that it is perpetually...
And once again, if I go back to my earlier example – because it's one of the most brilliant
films of this kind – to the example of Shirley Clarke’s Portrait of Jason, it's really fantastic,
because in effect, you have a black guy from Harlem who is a genius. He's a prodigious actor,
he fabulates, but in the sense of being a total mythomaniac. And it's obvious that through this
very individual mythomania, which the guy carries out with genius, he's also part of his
people, meaning that the act of fabulation, in a different way, also applies to the constitution
of a black people in the United States. And Shirley Clarke's film is political in this sense...
[Recording interrupted; 59:40]

Part 2

... So, this is all very complicated. Do you understand why I'm saying this? Someone asked
me about Pierre Perrault. Ah, well, it was... here's a short answer. You see, Perrault's work is
often shown in film houses… you should go and see it. It's amazing! I'll have a chance to talk
about it if I don't drag this out too much, not this time but other times. He's one of the guys I
admire most right now. Of course, he’s not young. I'm not talking about the young
filmmakers, alas, I don't know their work well enough. Pierre Perrault is a guy who must be
in his sixties.

Student: … I saw a retrospective called “The History of the Palestinian People” [indistinct
remarks] that said that the State of Israel… well, at least in this book I read, was created in
the 20th century...

Deleuze: As a people, yes.

Student: As a people, yes. I don't know if the State of Israel appears in the 20th century,
which means there was already a people who hadn't said “I exist”, as a discourse, but...

Deleuze: No, sorry, I'm not saying that the Palestinians are the first to carry out this operation
of constituting a people through fabulation. It was obvious that, for example – I don't know if
I understand your remark correctly – but it's quite obvious that regarding completely different
circumstances, there's even a film that will be essential for us, when the time comes, and if
we can make it… and that’s Moses and Aaron by [Jean-Marie] Straub [1975], which asks
under what conditions the Jewish people constituted itself as a people. Perhaps I'm not
answering your question?

Student: No, it's not that... you said there were Palestinian people before... [indistinct words]

Deleuze: Yes... but you don't know the nuances! You should understand… it's all very
difficult. It's not that you don't understand, but your understanding is too literal… you see,

I'm forced to simplify in order to go faster, and each time it’s up to you to correct what I say.
I don't mean to say that the Palestinian people didn't exist, but then again, maybe I do mean
that. I don't know, do you understand? The word “people” has, let's say, a lot of possible
meanings. Then we'd have to go back to that, which would send us back... it would take me
half an hour to distinguish four or five meanings of the word “people”. And I'd say, well, it
existed as a people in this sense, but it didn't exist as a people in another sense. In a way,
that's why – I'm counting on you – every time, your job is to put things into perspective, to
introduce nuances that I can't introduce… speaking out loud, I can't introduce them. There are
nuances that I can't bring in. I have to go at it with a claw hammer. It's up to you to shape and
rearrange things better.

And so, of course, it existed as a people… but in what way? It existed as a specific set of
lineages. Or, if you say to me: they were already a people in a specific sense of lineage, I'd
say, well, okay, it existed in that sense. They existed as farmers, they existed as, I'd say,
territorialized people. But they didn't own the land, so they didn't exist as a people. What is a
people who are… and whose status is that not even of farmers but of sharecroppers? And as
for property deeds, well, the Palestinians didn't even know what they were. In other words,
they existed, but only on paper, which allowed the Turks to sell a lot of land to the Zionists.
Then the Palestinians learned that they didn't even understand what that meant. For them,
land was the property of the lineage – then they learned that land wasn't the property of the
lineage at all, that it was the property of the piece of paper that resided in Turkey, and in the
name of which they were being expelled. They were, if you'll pardon the expression, literally
deterritorialized. At the very moment when they were deterritorialized, that is, in losing the
fundamental quality of a people, which is to be territorialized, they constituted themselves as
a people... [Recording interrupted; 1:05:03]

... so that they would invent themselves as a people. And when they were told: You are not
Palestinians, you are only Arabs from Palestine, they would be able to reply: We have
become Palestinians. And yet they already were. This is what Perrault shows so well.
Perrault shows it's a matter of inventing a people that are missing. Actually, Perrault says it
better: It's about inventing a people who already exist. And you understand, if it's a question
of inventing it, it's because in a certain way, it may already exist, but in a certain way it's also
missing. And that's the beauty of Perrault's formula, inventing a people who already exist.
Well, it's all very complicated...

Student: No, now it's clear.

Deleuze: Now it’s clear? Well, perfect then. There was someone who… yes?

Student: I wanted to say that, actually, if you could ask an Arab… [inaudible remarks] to
expel him, but I understand that in a less linguistic sense there was a… [inaudible remarks]
between 1948 when the Palestinians were Arabs and considered themselves Arabs and then
later, when a people was formed who thought of themselves as a people.

Deleuze: I don't think I'd agree with you on that one, but let's not go on about it because... I
wouldn't agree with you, because for me, as for many Palestinians, there weren't two wars,
there were three. And the first war was completely short-circuited, in other words, it's
generally denied, and denied for very, very specific reasons. It was a war that the Palestinians
waged on their own under the leadership of the Grand Mufti, and it was followed by the
second war and Jordan... But there was an initial period when the war was solely between

Israelis and Palestinians, and the English of course. Now the English… it’s very complex. So
much so that I believe that from the start, they absolutely, and above all in this first war, saw
themselves as being in the process of constituting themselves as Palestinians. It wasn't
afterwards that they saw themselves as Palestinians, it was during this war led by the Mufti...

Student: But at the time, it was just a war between the Jews and the Arabs.

Deleuze: No, it was only the Palestinians who were fighting. It wasn't a war between Jews
and Arabs, it was a war between the Jews, who were establishing the Zionist state, and the
Palestinians, period. The Arabs then came in with the Jordanians to join in this war, and there
was a more – here I have no memory of the dates – but there was a very, very long period
when there was only Palestinian resistance... but that long period was drowned out by the
idea of a war. What you're saying, I think – and I'm not reproaching you – repeats the readymade formula, which I think is historically false. I'm not saying I'm right, but it's very
important because it was very important for the Israelis, precisely, in their idea that it was
above all necessary to deny that there existed Palestinians. To deny the existence of the
Palestinians, in this undertaking, it was very important to deny that there was an initial period
when the only enemies were the Zionists and the Palestinians, but not at all the other Arabs.
Not at all! If you're familiar with this... you just have to look at the dates themselves: there
was the whole resistance movement that adhered to the Grand Mufti, which was very, very
interesting and which, in my opinion, was one of the main moments in the constitution of the
Palestinians as a people. So, it wasn't after that, it was precisely at that time, I think. See for
yourselves… well, all this is too... you have to see for yourselves.

Georges Comtesse: [inaudible words] ... Jean Rouch, in the sense that in the films I've seen
by Jean Rouch, there isn't simply a narrative, a narrative that would derive from it, even if the
narration is relative… through this series of films, Jean Rouch… he tries, in his own unique
way, to capture something that lies between the images and, precisely, the narration, even if it
is relative. And we can say that, for example, in Jean Rouch's first film where he made a
return to Africa,8 which is from 1974 and it’s his last African film, and – how can I put it? –
the film's series, he captures something in a unique space between images and narration, a
system that can be called a language system, which perhaps, and probably wrongly, has a
different status than the one you give… and he will be able to release a narrative, and the
language system is always a system with three differences. For example, whatever the film,
we see individuals, let's say, caught up in this language system.

The first difference is always the sacred, religious difference between life and death. The
second difference is what we might call the difference extracted from filiation which passes,
for example, in the sons of water through the rhythm of circumcision, which is a kind of
contempt, hatred of daughters… [indistinct word] afflicted, which is a difference extracted
from filiation. And the third difference is the hierarchical difference, subordinating men and
women through a completely regulated division of classes, roles, functions, status, spaces,
and so on. And these three differences, these three differences, are the same. And these three
differences – the sacred difference between life and death, the difference extracted from a
filiation, the hierarchical difference between men and women – can be said to be a language
system that determines individuals. And the question I'd like to pose is this: does
fictionalizing oneself, does fictionalizing oneself, really perturb this language system that the
unique space of the film series captures, or is it simply a way of reproducing it through,
precisely, a gap, a difference of view in relation to this system that is perhaps itself a system
of gaps?

Deleuze: You understand, you're telling me, if I sum up your very interesting intervention,
you're telling me: there are other aspects of Rouch. Of course, there are. I didn't claim that all
aspects of Rouch's work resided in the one I’m insisting on. Secondly, you're telling me that
the other aspects you're highlighting are more profound than mine. That's where I rush to
embrace you, I recognize you! And you're telling me that what you bring out can't be reduced
to the linguistic process of semiocritique. I'm not sure, because I was worried when you were
speaking about gaps, which are obviously not movement gaps in your mind, and which seem
to me to be gaps that are totally language-related, in the sense that linguists talk about gaps.
But even if that wasn't what you meant, I'll tell you, I've listened carefully, I think – it's
becoming like a kids’ squabble, so there's no point in pursuing it – you can always tell me the
aspects I've just mentioned – I recognized your favorite tactics – well, my act of fictionmaking is subordinate to these aspects.

I'd say to you, I don't have the impression… well, I have the impression that it's the opposite.
I have the impression that everything you've said, though I find it very interesting, is less
important than this fundamental act of cinema, once again of cinéma verité, which consists in
catching red-handed the passage to fiction, meaning when someone starts to fictionalize, or
rather when someone starts to fabulate, it's the only way – you understand what it means,
that's why it seems important to me once again – it's the only way not to reproduce the
discourse of the masters or the colonizers. When... this is where I think Perrault is very... this
is why, for me, this is the fundamental act.

So, what would be interesting is that, yes, there's an act of language, in fabulation, there's an
act of language – but we'll see later which kind, I can't say all at once – so what you’re
saying, okay, it's one path, which for me is relatively close to semiocritique, even if you were
doing an original semiocritique. You have every right to do so, but once again I think, at this
point, we can only say, well, no, I'm the one who's right, I'm the one who's right, and I hope
you are no more interested in this than I am. So, there are these two ways… you've added,
you've demonstrated, but I'm not so sure that this is so obvious and that the act of fictionmaking I'm talking about would be subordinate to the aspects you claim are more profound.

Comtesse: But I've seen it in the films...

Deleuze: No, listen… that, that… I'm telling you, no, that's your favorite argument… it's in
the films, that's it, it's the Stalinist argument that pisses me off.

Comtesse: [Inaudible comments]

Deleuze: Well, no, stop, listen, because we're already late!

Comtesse: [Inaudible comments] ... but how do I know...

Deleuze: He does it to me every time! I can't take this anymore.

Comtesse: If we take Jaguar, for example…

Deleuze: It's ten years he’s been going on like this!

Comtesse: [Inaudible words] ... where he fictionalizes himself like a jaguar, like an animal
that struts around… [indistinct words] strutting around. He fictionalizes himself, and when he

returns to the village, what does he say now, now that he's become the glory of the big city?
What does he say to the girl, the young girl in the village? He's telling her something that
pertains, obviously, to language or to this system of differences I'm talking about. He's not
saying “I want to marry you,”, he's saying “I'm marrying you”! That's crazy, try to understand
this!

Deleuze: Grrrrr… Listen, you have a genius for combining relatively interesting things in
what you say with propositions that are perfectly unpalatable to everyone. You always take
people for idiots, that's your only fault. You take people for idiots, even as you finish a
speech with “Try to understand this!” I assure you, I would never dare talk to people the way
you do. I wouldn't dare, I've never said to a student, “Try to understand this!” But do you
realize? Who do you think you are? Who do you think you are? You dare to end something
by saying “Try to understand this!”, Try to understand the unfathomable depth of what I've
just said! No, that's not acceptable! I can't take it anymore! We need a break! Five-minute
break... [Recording interrupted; 1:19:52]

Deleuze: ... but if movement is the immediate given of the image, there is no fact of narration.
Narration stems from a particular process that we can call the process of image specification,
namely the way in which the movement-image is specified in a certain number of image
types, the way in which the time-image is specified in a certain number of image types. So
that’s the first point.

Let me move on to the second point. What does it mean to say that the cinematographic
image is a statement, or the equivalent of an analogical statement, that is, that it operates by
resemblance? This obviously assumes that the analogical image – and Metz's text confirms
this – that the analogical image is related by resemblance to an object that is its referent, so to
speak. My point of view is very simple, and I offer it as a general proposition, therefore
something very obscure at first sight. This would be true precisely if we could bracket out
movement. If we could bracket movement in the image, then yes, the image could be
considered as an analogical statement that refers to resemblance, to an object that would be
its referent. But movement has the property of making the image and its object indiscernible.

Now you might say that this is something that pertains only to cinema. No, it's not specific to
cinema. I could say exactly the same thing about painting in another context. I always come
back to this question: can we say that so-called classical painting is figurative? If we can, it's
the same as saying that a painting is an analogical statement that relates by resemblance to an
object that is its referent. Everyone knows that this is not the case. Why not? Because
painting, figurative or not, does not proceed by resemblance. Painting, whether figurative or
not, proceeds by modulation: sometimes modulation of light, sometimes modulation of color,
sometimes both.

I would say of modulation exactly what I said of movement, namely that modulation, like
movement – and this is not surprising – suffices to make the image and its object
indiscernible. This is perfectly normal, since cinema not only proceeds by movement-image,
but also modulation in light and in color, when color is used, form part of cinematographic
movement. And in previous years, we studied the way light modulation can be very different,
for example, in German Expressionism as opposed to the pre-war French school, or the
difference in the modulation of colors in great colorists like Minnelli or Antonioni.

Okay, so this is where we’ve got to, you see it's for the same reasons – I mean, if what I'm
saying makes sense… – it's obviously for the same reasons that semiocritique has bracketed
out movement as an immediate given of the cinematographic image and has been able to
conclude that the cinematographic image is assimilable to a statement by analogy. For if you
reintroduce movement into the image, you see that movement in the image makes the image
and its object indiscernible. So, what does this mean? And what is this indiscernibility of
image and object from the point of view of the cinematographic image?

Regarding this, [Pier Paolo] Pasolini tells us – and here we come back to one of Pasolini's
most bizarre theses – Pasolini tells us that the object is precisely a part of the image. And he's
not just saying the object is part of the image – you see, he's already against the idea of
analogical image-statement – the object is a part of the image. Why is that? Not only, not
only. What's more, the object is the second articulation of the image. And suddenly this
becomes really important. Why is that? By telling us that the object is the second articulation
of the image, he's telling us that the object is the equivalent of the phoneme. You remember
that the phoneme was the second articulation of language. And he adds: What is the first
articulation? The first articulation is the shot. The shot is the equivalent of the moneme. But
the object… what object? Well, the framed object, the object framed in the shot. The shot is
the equivalent of the moneme, and the object framed in the shot is the equivalent of the
phoneme.

Cinema has two articulations, and what does this mean in essence? You see how it is – here
again, you have to fill in all the nuances as you listen to me – which means first of all that
cinema is a language. We've seen, in fact, that double articulation defines language, which
means that Pasolini wants to go further than semiocritique on its very own terrain.
Semiocritique told us how cinema is not a language because there is no double articulation,
and language is defined precisely by double articulation. But cinema is a language system,
semiocritique also told us. And why is that? Because the cinematographic image is subject to
codes, first and foremost the syntagmatic, which define a language process. Hence the
formula: cinema isn't a language, it's a language system. It has no double articulation, and is
therefore not a language. It is a language system because it is subject to syntagms. You'll
remember that, since we analyzed it quite thoroughly.

Pasolini's position seems frightening, the way he calmly states that phonemes are the objects
framed in the shot, while monemes are the shots. Cinema has two articulations, cinema is a
language. Immediately, I mean... you always have to... what he's telling us isn’t linear. We
make leaps! We can say that Pasolini returns to the old thesis that was denounced by
semiocritique: cinema as a universal language. And the whole of semiocritique was
constituted to say, no, cinema is not a language, it's a language system, a language system
without a language, as Metz put it. And now, as if completely unaware of this critique of
cine-language, Pasolini calmly and patiently tells us that cinema is a language.

A new needling blow to which the chorus of semioticians is either indignant or mocking.
They say, What is he talking about? How could it occur to Pasolini to equate the objects
framed in the shot with phonemes? Because you remember what a phoneme is. I'll say it
again, to keep to my old example. I say billard [billiard table], well, the phoneme /b/ is /b/
versus /p/, but a phoneme is not an object. It has nothing to do with an object. What does it
have to do with? What's more, what is an object framed in the shot? Either it's the referent
object, namely the object shown, the revolver as the image of the revolver shows it by
resemblance. It’s either... but this is not the referent, a phoneme has never been the object that

serves as a referent. Or else, it's the object in the image, the object as it is framed in the shot.
In this case, it's what linguists would call a portion of the signified, but a phoneme has never
been a portion of the signified. A phoneme is a distinctive unit without any meaning. It's a
distinctive unit, but one without any meaning. Therefore, it would seem to me that in no
sense can the object framed in the shot be assimilated to a phoneme.

So, Eco… Umberto Eco, as I was saying, is highly mocking towards Pasolini. He's very
tenacious. Pasolini has more than one trick up his sleeve. And here he goes on – it's a
perpetual needling – Don't you want, don't you want cinema to be a language? You see, he's
used the theme of double articulation… you see how he proceeds, because Pasolini's texts in
Heretical Empiricism9 are so difficult that I'd like to help you with a possible reading of
them. He uses the theme of double articulation to say, contra semiocritique, What if cinema
was a language? And then they say to him, No, Pasolini, you're so naive. To which he replies,
Let me finish, let me finish, it is a language… but in what sense? And he blithely adds: In
fact, it’s the language of reality, it's the language of reality.10

Things are getting more and more interesting, because he goes so far as to say: you
semiocritics have never understood anything about semiotics – he's taking his revenge – you
don't understand semiocritique, since you don't understand semiotics, because semiotics, he
says, is the science of reality. Semiotics is the science of reality. Science of reality, language
of the real or language of reality: let's say that these amount to the same. It's the semiology of
reality that we must undertake, that's the slogan I've been shouting to myself for months. I'm
looking for the exact quote, the quote on the science of reality… “What is not arbitrary is to
say instead that cinema is predicated on a "system of signs" which is different from the
written-spoken one; that is, that cinema is another language…” – another language, you
know, the language of reality. In what sense is it another language? – “But it is not another
language in the sense that Bantu is different from Italian” – not in the sense that one language
differs from another language, but in the sense that the language of reality is different from
what? It's different from any language system.

Well, cinema is the language of reality in the sense that the language of reality is not a
language distinct from other languages, but a language that is different from all language
systems, whether verbal or non-verbal. Here, things get more and more complicated. You'll
recall the thesis of semiocritique: cinema isn't a language, it is a language system. It's a
language system that isn't itself a verbal language, but to which we can apply certain
characteristics of verbal languages, namely syntagmatics. Pasolini asserts his grip by telling
us: cinema is not a language system, whether verbal or non-verbal. Cinema is a language, but
beware! It's not a language that differs from another language, the way Italian differs from
Bantu. It's a language that is the language of reality, and is therefore different from any
language system, verbal or non-verbal.

We still don't understand what the thesis means, but it's beginning to look quite splendid, and
we can see that it's not a return. Or if it is a return to the classic thesis of cinema as a
language, a universal language, it will be such a renewed and enriching return. Okay. What's
he trying to say? Let's try to interpret it freely. All this, all the texts I'm referring to are in
Heretical Empiricism… pages 167-222… you can easily find it.

But I return to the question that we looked at two years ago, or three years ago, I don't
know… to my question of the movement-image. Everything will become clear, and it's
always for the same reason: it's because semiocritique has eliminated movement in the image

that it's been able to link it to language system, and so on. If we begin with the movementimage, we might find that Pasolini is saying something extremely simple and rigorous.
Movement has two sides, movement in the image has two sides. On the one hand – I mean,
the movement-image has two sides – on one side, it expresses a Whole that changes, it
expresses a change in a Whole. On the other side, it is distributed among different objects,
some of which are said to be immobile and others mobile.

Example: birds take flight, the birds’ departure. So, the birds are leaving. You're in your
house and you say, Which birds? Let’s imagine it’s the storks that are leaving. You had a
stork there and now the stork is leaving, okay. It's a movement-image. This movement-image
has two sides. It expresses a Whole, but in what sense? A Whole that changes. This changing
Whole is what we call seasonal variation. It is distributed among different objects, some of
which are said to be moving or mobile, while others are immobile. The chimney where the
stork made its nest remains immobile, while the bird leaves. There's a distribution of
movement. Okay, I would say that every movement-image has these two sides. Every
movement-image is, on one side, turned towards a Whole whose qualitative change it
expresses, the change of season, and on the other side, it is turned towards objects whose
respective positions it expresses – what is moving and what is immobile.

Let me add that the movement-image is the circulation of the two levels. I've got two levels,
two levels: one where… the movement-image itself implies two levels… a movement by
which it is turned towards the Whole that changes and expresses this change of the Whole –
the stork’s departure expresses the change of season – and another level where it is turned
towards the objects among which the movement is distributed. I've got my two levels, and
there is circulation between the two. What does this mean? It means that the movementimage never ceases to differentiate itself according to the objects among which movement is
distributed, and at the same time, it never ceases to integrate itself into the changing Whole
that the image expresses. Some of you may remember that we spent several months on this, a
long time ago. What more do you want?

And this is my second remark… remember how my first remark was based on the discovery
of a process specific to images, which I called the process of specification: how a movementimage gives rise to different types of image. Now, in my second remark – and this is to insist
on the coherence of all this – I find myself faced with the second process of the movementimage, a completely different process, which I would call the process of differentiation and
integration.11 Above all, we must not confuse the two. The process of specifying the
movement-image is the process by which the movement-image gives rise to different types of
movement-image: perception-image, action-image, affection-image. The process of
differentiation-integration is the process by which the movement-image gives rise to two
levels: one defined by the objects among which movement is distributed, the other defined by
the change in the Whole that the movement expresses.

Let's talk about crime, since I’ve already mentioned the psychoanalytical use of crime in
cinema according to semiocritique: a man enters and steers a woman into her bedroom, and
the camera accompanies him to the door. Then the camera moves back down the stairs and so
on, and frames the window from outside. It's a movement. This movement is distributed
among certain objects, some of which are fixed, others mobile. This movement expresses a
changing Whole. There's no need to draw a picture: between the two, the woman has been
murdered. It's the famous Hitchcock tracking shot.12 A camera movement, the movement
here being necessarily that of the camera, but it can be that of the characters too, there are all

kinds of possibilities. Another example of the same kind, exactly the same in fact, no less
famous, is [Jean] Renoir’s La Chienne [The Bitch, 1931], where the camera leaves the couple
when the man is at his wit's end, at the end of his rope, and then comes back in through the
window in a fantastic tracking shot typical of Renoir. It comes in through the window to
discover the woman's corpse in the bedroom. Exactly the same. Between the two moments,
everything has changed, and the woman is dead.

So, what am I saying here? I'm saying that the movement-image is the bearer not only of a
process of specification, but also of a process of differentiation-integration. In this process of
differentiation-integration, there are two levels, Pasolini's two articulations. What do these
two articulations consist of? Well, the shot, the movement-image expresses a changing
Whole, and here Pasolini chuckles… Let me call it a meaningful unit. But it's a meaningful
unit of the real: unity of the image and the real. The image becomes reality… in cinema, the
image becomes reality insofar as the movement-image expresses change in a Whole.

Secondly: the movement-image does not express change in a Whole, that is to say it does not
become reality without at the same time being distributed among objects… without being
distributed among objects. This is differentiation. It's the differentiation of the movementimage that has nothing to do with its specification, which is a completely different process.
Pasolini adds: Let me call this second articulation, this second aspect through which
movement cannot express a Whole that changes without being distributed among objects
framed in the image. Let me call first articulation... sorry, I mean second, second articulation,
this second aspect, and let me say that cinema is a language, yes! But a language we've never
spoken, a language that can't be reduced to any language system whatsoever, verbal or nonverbal. It's the language of reality, that is, the process by which the image becomes reality
and the object becomes image. The image becomes reality, that's the first side of the
movement-image; the object becomes image, that's the second side.

In other words, cinema is the language of reality, precisely because it has nothing to do with
language systems: it's a language without language system, verbal or non-verbal. What is a
language without verbal or non-verbal language system? The language of reality. What does
it speak with? It speaks with objects, and it speaks with objects because the image itself is the
real that speaks through the object... [Recording interrupted; 1:51:29]

... even monemes, he needed all of this to succeed, in my view, in blowing the whole
“language system without language” thesis out of the water and opposing to it a “language
without language system”. And in the end, the movement of Pasolini’s thought is so
complicated, it seems to me that, strangely enough, he lets himself get caught up in it.
Discussions arise about Pasolini, where people say, Ah, well, yes, there are points where I
agree, but there are also some points where I disagree, and so on but in fact, this misses the
point. It's that Pasolini really thinks in a completely different way, absolutely in a completely
different way. In his language of reality, it is no longer… it’s absolutely no longer a question
of any kind of linguistic process, whether syntagmatic or paradigmatic, and yet he'll speak
about all this! Oh, he'll do it all, he'll do it all. That's the beauty of it. Except that with all
these codes, all the syntagmatic or paradigmatic codes, he'll push things to the point of
placing them under the domination of an Ur-code, as he calls it, a code beyond codes, which
consists precisely in decoding them, in decodifying them.

It's a very, very beautiful idea, which brings us back to the idea: yes, you can say in a certain
way that cinema is a language, though not in the way the first filmmakers saw it as a

universal language, namely a language that really was a language – no, it's more than that.
Once again, it's the language of reality, it’s reality speaking through cinema. So, well, we're
back to language.

I'd say, I'm just drawing conclusions: if I'm not wrong in this interpretation I'm proposing of
Pasolini – and you have every right to think… it's up to you to say if you think I'm wrong,
once again, none of this is easy – if I'm not wrong, our second point is settled. Namely, I see
no reason to treat the cinematographic image as the equivalent of an analogical statement. It
is neither a statement nor is it analogical. Quite simply, it is inseparable from a process that is
no longer that of specification, but that of differentiation and integration, and which, to bring
all these processes together, I can now summarize in the following way: specified images,
that is according to their three types, specified images are linked together, but in being linked
together, they are integrated into a Whole that, for its part, never ceases to differentiate itself
according to the objects of the image. I've combined the two processes of specification and
differentiation-integration, which are irreducible to any language process.

Hence, the third and final point: if cinema is a language in this sense, what do we mean by
language? We return to our question, which was even that of classical cinema, classical
cinema, that in Eisenstein’s terms, lays claim to the status of interior monologue. But what is
an interior monologue in terms of language? What is it? When Eisenstein tells us that it is not
the novel, but only cinema that is capable of realizing the full potentiality of the interior
monologue… what does this mean, what can it mean? Well, it could mean a lot of things, and
this is our last point.

So, as this point is going to be again quite complicated, you can forget about that for the
moment. I'm so behind this time, but this will be the last time things are so difficult… from
next time on, it's all going to get easy. I was counting on it being easy today, but then I don't
know what happened, I fell behind, but after this point, there won’t be any more difficulties.
However, this one is really difficult, isn't it?

What I’ll tell you is this. There's a first response we could make, saying: well, yes, cinema
isn't a language, so be it. What is the language of reality? Is the language of reality the
interior monologue? Perhaps, but what is the interior monologue? First answer: it's a
primitive, primitive language. Pasolini already said no, it's not Bantu. Is Bantu a primitive
language? I don’t know, but in any case, primitive language or not… no, it's not a primitive
language. So, it would be better to risk saying that it’s a protolanguage, a protolanguage.
Cinema considered as interior language… no, sorry, as interior monologue or as the language
of reality, would be a protolanguage.13

And after all, some of Eisenstein's contemporaries were working in this direction. You'd have
to show how a protolanguage differs from a language. There were linguists, there were
already linguists – they weren't born... – there were already such figures as linguists, and
these linguists went quite far, and Cahiers du cinema published their texts, or a part of their
texts, in two issues, number 220 and 221,14 texts by two important Soviet linguists, one called
[Boris] Eichenbaum – you can spell it how you like, whatever, you'll always be right, since
it's all arbitrary anyway – and the other called [Lev] Vygotsky… They circled around… they
said, be careful, it's a very complicated matter. That doesn't mean visualizing linguistic
givens, no. It's more as if there were linguistic valences in the procession of visual images.
The interior monologue would be like a sequence of linguistic valences based on visual
images that resonate in our heads, which occur before our eyes and resonate in our heads.

And Vygotsky says, it should almost be… it wouldn't be… it wouldn't be, it wouldn't be
phonic, says Vygotsky. He proposed a very strange notion of “endophonics”: there would be
endophonics linked to the procession of visual images, and this would constitute the interior
monologue, or a kind of protolanguage, the equivalent of which would be found not in Bantu
but in the child. Well, they were trying to resolve the problem, but… – I'm going very
quickly here – their studies are very interesting.

But it doesn’t quite work, it doesn't feel right, why doesn't it feel right? I don't know, it
doesn't feel right to me. No, in the end… because they're onto something, I mean, the
problem they leave us with: what is the relation between protolanguage and language
systems? Maybe the relation we're seeking isn't that between protolanguage and language
systems… but what is it then? What is it? [Recording interrupted; 2:01:26]

Part 3

Second hypothesis… here we are groping in the dark. The great Danish linguist, [Louis]
Hjelmslev, well known to you all, writes – sorry, I've got the wrong line... Oh no, I've lost the
quotation... if I lose my quotation, I'm lost because... Oh la la la la! I've got it! It's very short,
my aim is not to give a course on Hjelmslev, because that wouldn’t be easy.

Hjelmslev explains that – and I'll say this very quickly – according to him, language is
constituted by the form and substance of expressions and the form and substance of content.
If you like, he replaces the Saussurian signifier-signified distinction with a form of
expression-form of content distinction, but it's not simply a verbal substitution. And I think
that this changes everything. So, he invents this notion: form of expression and form of
content, roughly speaking, let's say, which correspond very roughly to signifier-signified.
And this is what he says: The form is projected – it's the most... it's not the most difficult
sentence, it's Hjelmslev's most mysterious sentence, that is so disputed, that’s why I say it to
you – “…the form is projected” – meaning, the form of expression and the form of content –
“the form is projected onto meaning” – or sometimes it’s translated in French as “onto
matter”… whereas in the English word can mean both as can the original Danish. The form
of expression and the form of content are projected onto meaning – and Hjelmslev, though
rather stingy with metaphors, adds – “as a taut net casts its shadow over an uninterrupted
surface”. We project the form of expression and the form of content onto meaning, namely
onto matter, like a taut net casts its shadow over an uninterrupted surface.

Matter or meaning is an uninterrupted surface, which must be distinguished from what? From
form and substance. Why is this? Because substance is formed matter. Substance is formed
matter. So, there will be a substance of content and a substance of expression, since there are
two forms, a form of content and a form of expression. Well, form of content and form of
expression, which inform matter to make it substance of content and substance of expression,
well, form of expression and form of content project themselves onto meaning as a taut net
casts its shadow over an uninterrupted surface. In other words – I have no problem with it, no
problem at all, so I'll tell you, though I still have a lot of questions – what Hjelmslev calls
matter or meaning is matter that is not linguistically formed, it’s not linguistically formed. It's
non-linguistically formed matter. Indeed, as soon as it is linguistically formed, it has become
a substance of content or substance of expression. Meaning is therefore a matter that is not
linguistically formed, and yet – I would add – it can be perfectly formed from points of view
other than linguistics, which I think Hjelmslev recognizes, but with a small caveat: not
linguistically formed, but which can be formed in another way, from other points of view,

and which is a correlate, I would say, how? Here I'm looking for a provisional word – an
“ideal” correlate of language systems, or one that is a specific presupposition of language
systems – well, it’s up to you, both are probably true – language systems have a specific
presupposition.

Do you understand what I mean? It doesn't imply a psychological presupposition. It doesn't
mean something that precedes the language system. No, by specific presupposition I mean a
matter, a matter that doesn't exist independently of the language system, that is to say, ideal,
and yet is distinct from the language system, and such that the language system wouldn't exist
if it weren't for this non-language, this non-linguistically formed matter. Language systems
have as their correlate a non-linguistically formed matter. The same applies to language:
language and language systems have as their correlate a matter that is not linguistically
formed, but formed from another point of view.

I'd like to point out right away that – this text by Hjelmslev has obviously raised a huge
number of questions – that in the text, Hjelmslev says, "not semiotically formed", which
bothers me some, but which doesn't affect me. I mean, for one simple reason, it's obvious that
in this context, Hjelmslev is identifying – as he's entitled to – semiotics with linguistics. But I
who, as you can already feel, believe that I have every reason to distinguish quite firmly, as
firmly as I can, between semiotics and linguistics, would say that Hjelmslev's matter is not
linguistically formed, and that it can be formed from another point of view, and in particular
that it can be formed semiotically, if we’re speaking about a semiotics that presupposes
nothing of language and language systems. In any case, it is not linguistically formed.

So, I'd say we've taken a small step forward, we've moved on, we've moved on. We no longer
say… the cinematographic image as we defined it, you'll recall, through its double process.
what I remember from the first two points is that we defined the cinematographic image in
terms of a double process, which has nothing to do with a language system and which isn't
linguistic, which isn't language-related, the process of specification, and the process of
differentiation-integration. I would say that there's no longer any need to force the issue the
way Pasolini does. There's no need to say “this is the language of reality”. Let's simply say –
well, simply, I don't know if this makes things any clearer – it's a non-linguistically formed
matter that is the correlate of all languages and language systems.

Now here we have a difficult problem: what are we going to do with this matter? What do
you expect a linguist to do with it, since it's not linguistically formed? Hence, in a book
subsequent to the one I quoted, the problems – and here I say this without any irony – the
problems and embarrassments of Metz, who, as a disciple of Hjelmslev, at least in one aspect
of his work, asks himself: what can I do with the notion of matter as distinct from the notion
of substance? And he devotes a whole chapter of Film Language,15 a very, very difficult
chapter, at the end of which it seems to me he concludes that he has nothing to do, and
cinema has nothing to do, with the pure notion of non-linguistically formed matter.

So, here we are. One more effort. What can this matter be? It has to be said that Hjelmslev is
personally highly discreet about the status of this matter in all his work. Let's look elsewhere.
Going through Hjelmslev was a pleasant pastime. It gave us something to work with. We said
to ourselves: ah no, perhaps it's not worth defining the cinematographic image by its
processes, in its non-linguistically formed processes; perhaps it's not worth defining it as the
language of reality. Let's content ourselves with defining it as this matter that is not
linguistically formed, but formed, but perfectly formed semiotically, since I have no reason to

identify semiotics and linguistics, on the contrary. This matter… and now I no longer have to
concern myself with Hjelmslev. He gave me a word – what more could I ask for? – matter.

You'll tell me it's not much. Yes, it is. It's enormous! Because this matter is in fact
semiotically formed, since it is inseparable from the process of specification and the process
of integration-differentiation, and these are semiotic processes. But they are not languagerelated processes. They're not linguistic processes. They have nothing to do with linguistic
processes. In a sense, I would say, they are ideally pre-linguistic, not in the sense of a child's
language, but in the sense of a condition. The non-linguistic matter is the condition itself.
That's why I was talking about an ideal condition. It's the ideal condition to which language
and language systems will respond, or which will serve as a correlate of language and
language systems. What can it be?

So now we have to analyze this semiotically formed and not linguistically formed matter.
That would be a decisive step. Another linguist appears on the horizon. But at this point
things are getting harder and harder. His name is Gustave Guillaume. And he practices a very
strange kind of linguistics. And he publishes his texts in impossibly rare editions, and it's
extremely difficult to read his texts outside the library. Klincksieck published one, Langage
et science du langage,16 but I'm afraid it hasn't been available for a long time, it cannot be
found. So, in practice, access to Guillaume's work is only possible in the library.

Hidenobu Suzuki: Actually... it's been republished by Nizet.

Deleuze: Has it been republished? Good job it’s been republished, so those who are interested
in... you have to... you have to read it. Fortunately, someone very talented, called Edmond
Ortigues, wrote a book for Aubier, I don't know if it too has disappeared... is it available
again? Well, that's great… it's called Le discours et le symbole [1962], and the second part of
Le discours et le symbole is a rather long account of Guillaume's main theses. It's better, I
would say it's better that you read Guillaume than Ortigues, although Ortigues is also
excellent… but if you don’t find Guillaume, you can always read the second part of Ortigues.
And what I want to tell you is… unfortunately Ortigues doesn’t put things in the simplest
terms. And the simplest part of Guillaume's linguistic theory is this, and you'll see why
linguists don't appreciate it much. I tell you the simplest… well... okay.

Guillaume tells us, more or less, that a word, or – let's not be too playful, but let's not be too
rigorous either, a minimal meaningful unit, if you prefer, a moneme, in the sense we saw
earlier; we saw that the moneme is not the same as the word, but that doesn't matter, to
simplify we say a word – well, a word, as a meaningful unit, in all its uses, has only one
meaning. Ah, it’s a strange one... – Guillaume is the last of the great linguist-philosophers, it's
curious, isn't it? No, it's not curious, it's normal – beyond all its meanings, a word has only
one meaning. This meaning, he says, we will call “signified of potentiality”.17

But this word – and I mean in all its uses in discourse – has only one meaning. Only
according to this or that use, this word exerts a certain “aim” on the signified of potentiality.
It expresses a certain point of view on the signified of potentiality or, if you prefer – and here
you'll sense something that's familiar to you, or should be familiar to you, I'm speaking for
those who were here in other years – it operates a certain cut on the signified of potentiality…
I mean, here's an idea. It's as though he takes an image, a snapshot of the signified of
potentiality from its use in discourse. Now you will say to me in chorus, oh, how curious,
isn't this linguist Bergsonian?

You see, there is a signified of potentiality, the word has only a signified of potentiality,
whatever its uses, but according to its use in discourse, it operates as a cut, as an
instantaneous image of the signified of potentiality. Insofar as it operates as such an
instantaneous image, insofar as it takes a "cut" from the signified of potentiality, it has, in
discourse, a “signified of effect”. The signified of potentiality is outside discourse. A word, in
all its uses in discourse, has only one meaning, its signified of potentiality. This signified of
potentiality is therefore outside discourse. But the word, according to its use in discourse,
operates a cut, an instantaneous vision of the signified of potentiality. It takes on a signified
of effect. The signified of effect expresses the cut that the word makes on the signified of
potentiality according to its use in discourse, according to this or that use of it in discourse.

So what will the signifier be? It's all very well for Guillaume to say, “I'm generalizing
Saussure”, but you must feel that it's going to be something quite different. According to
Guillaume, the signifier is only the word, namely the sign, the meaningful unit, the sign taken
with its signified of effect. That's what the signifier is. And the signified of effect is only a
provisional, instantaneous image, taken from the signified of potentiality, which is outside
discourse, meaning it is pre-signifying. You're going to tell me that all this is obscure, but I
like to start with the most obscure because then the example will become limpid.

So, you realize where he's going, and how delighted we must be. You must feel that for us,
this is going to provide a solution we never dreamed of. Salvation is coming our way. I'm not
saying that Guillaume's signified of potentiality is equivalent to Hjelmslev's matter. I would
say that it's a particularly concrete determination of Hjelmslev's matter, insofar as we can
interpret it. Hjelmslev's matter or meaning, where the sign casts its net, is exactly the same
thing. One says: form, namely the sign or the signifier, will cast its net over matter or
meaning. The other tells us: the sign, according to its use in discourse, will make a cut, will
give us an instantaneous image of the signified of potentiality, which is pre-signifying, that is
to say it pre-exists discourse. It's an ideal matter that pre-exists discourse… It's an ideal
matter that pre-exists discourse without which we wouldn’t be able to speak.

You'd think linguists would hate something like that. I wouldn’t be able to speak... but it's the
resurrection of philosophy! It's philosophy that has turned linguistics on its head and sneaks
up behind it. What a marvel! They don't like Guillaume, they don't like him at all! Ah, that's
odd. They hate Guillaume. They say, what's all this about? They say that what Guillaume
says is not reasonable. They say, he's a very good linguist, but only if you take away his case
of signified of potentiality.... That's obvious! They couldn't care less about the signified of
potentiality. But Guillaume does, so what is the signified of potentiality? There’s no longer
any choice. He'll also say – because he likes words, he’s very mysterious, isn't he, very
mysterious, this Guillaume – he sometimes says: it's the signified of mental life. And that
makes linguists go crazy: oh, yes, he's bringing us back to the idea of an ineffable
psychological life that precedes language systems. It's the signified of mental life. Yes, he
does say that it precedes language systems, that the signified of potentiality precedes
language systems, yes! But he doesn't say that it precedes language systems in fact, he says
that it precedes language systems by right, and that it's their ideal correlate. We couldn't
speak if there weren't... So, linguists say: that's idealism, that's philosophy. Yes, it is. It's
idealism, and it's philosophy. But it's also materialism. It's a matter, but it's an ideal matter.
Things are getting better and better. Whew!

An example: the concrete studies of Gustave Guillaume – I say Gustave every time so you
don't get confused, because there's a psychologist called Paul Guillaume. So, you shouldn’t

think it’s the same person. There's Paul, and there's Gustave. Paul did research on rats, and he
was a psychologist of intelligence, whereas Guillaume, I mean Gustave… they're not the
same. The concrete studies will focus on two main subjects. But they concern two studies,
one a study on languages that have articles, and the other on verbs. Once again, it doesn't
come down to... So, what will he do? He will identify certain processes. We're right at the
core of our problem. Can we conceive of non-language-related, non-linguistic semiotic
processes? There's no better way of putting it. This is my problem… in any case, this is my
problem, so accept it also as yours. Here's what he says: take the two forms of the article in
French, the definite article, “le”, and the indefinite article, “un”.18 You'll understand
everything, you'll understand everything… I could leave you after you've understood, but
then the next time, we'll have to start again on this, it won’t be easy, because... yes, well,
things will be better tomorrow... there'll be no more Guillaume! Okay.

He tells us – don't try too hard to understand yet – that the indefinite article “un” is
inseparable from a movement of "particularization". That is to say, “un” is a word, or if you
prefer a moneme, or if you prefer a meaningful unit, which particularizes. For example, un
homme [a man]. “Le” – you sense that this isn't the same atmosphere as that of Saussure, or
even Hjelmslev... and yet it's still pure linguistics – “le”, it appears, is inseparable from a
movement of generalization, l’homme est mortel [man is mortal]. J’ai rencontré un ami [I
met a friend], here you have particularization. L’homme est mortel or Tous les hommes sont
mes amis [All men are my friends] these are generalizations. They are generalizations. Well,
that's enough… it doesn't end there, but it's enough for you to understand.

What is the signified of potentiality? Well, yes, and why is the signified of potentiality the
signified of mental life? The signified of potentiality is movement. Can you imagine? For us,
but what a confirmation! We've been struggling, doing all this, for years, haven't we? That's
what encounters are, without knowing that... We knew it, but we didn't need it at the time.
The time has come when we need it. It's a day to celebrate! It's time to use Guillaume.
Before, before, we didn't need him. And then, alas, we'll have to part ways with Guillaume,
because I don't think he researched his processes well.

But here we have our two processes: the process of particularization, which corresponds to
the indefinite article; the process of generalization, which corresponds to the definite article.
Are you with me? That is what meaning is, or the signified of potentiality. That's what it is.
Whatever… however it is used in discourse, the indefinite article “un” has as its signified of
potentiality particularization as movement. Whatever its use in discourse, the signified of
potentiality of the definite article “le” is the movement of generalization as a movement of
thought. You see, it defines processes in the sense that a process is a movement considered as
a movement of thought. That's the signified of potentiality.

Now, imagine. Two phrases: L’ami que j’ai vu, I write it here, it's a definite article. I put it
there, anywhere, I put it there, I'll tell you why I put it there. L’ami que j’ai vu. Now,
L’homme est mortel, I put that over here. These are two uses of the article in discourse. L'ami
que j'ai vu is a point of view on the movement of generalization. It's the movement of
generalization grasped, I could almost say, at its lowest degree. L’ami que j’ai vu means I've
only seen one, but he's one of the friends I have. It's a degree of generalization very close to
particularity. And indeed, the movement of generalization begins from the particular. So, it's
a stage very close to the origin. L’homme est mortel is also a point of view on the movement
of generalization, but this time, one that is very close to the end, to the summit of

generalization. I'm going over to the other side. I'd say that – what was my first example? –
l’ami qui est venu…

Hidenobu Suzuki: L’ami que j’ai vu...

Deleuze: Yes, l’ami que j’ai vu is a signified of effect that corresponds to a determinable
point of view on the signified of potentiality of the definite article. The signified of
potentiality is the movement of generalization as a whole, and l’ami que j’ai vu… is a point
of view, a cut in this movement, a cut made, a cut that is close to the origin. It's nice, that, it's
nice. A bizarre kind of linguistics, you must feel that something is happening here. Right. Up
there, on the contrary, I'm not starting again… it's all up there, it's very close to l’homme est
mortel, it's the maximum generalization. So, it's up there, but it's also a point of view. See
what he's telling us. But from the point of view of the signified of potentiality, you can never
prevent each point of view from communicating with the others, and the signified of
potentiality entails all the points of view we can take on it in the discourse. And discourse
always operates... [Recording interrupted; 2:37:58]19

... I'm trying to construct a – no, I can't – Un ami est venu… Here, look… I take “un” at the
highest degree of its signified of potentiality, that is, of the movement of particularization. If I
say un homme est toujours mortel, on the other hand, I take it at the origin of the movement
of particularization. If you draw up a table – and I'm not going to overwhelm you, because
we'll see next time if we're all in good enough shape – if you draw up a table of positions,
meaning signifieds of effects, that can be uncoupled from the occurrences of a sign, the
occurrences of a word on the signifieds of potentiality, you'll see that some of them
correspond to each other, in such a way that you'll say to me: but what's the difference? I say
un homme est fallible and then I say l’homme est fallible. I can say both. Un homme est
toujours fallible, l’homme est fallible, un homme quelconque est fallible, l’homme est fallible.
Okay, they correspond, but they don't cut the same movement, the same signified of
potentiality. They don't cut the same signified of potentiality.

Example, practical exercise, for next time: should you say je fais de la soupe or je fais la
soupe? That's linguistics for you. Je fais de la soupe, je vais te faire de la soupe or je vais te
faire la soupe? What a problem! They are similar. Je fais la soupe is obviously caught in a
snapshot on a generalizing movement. Here and now, I'm making the soup, as I always have,
as it was yesterday and as it will be tomorrow. On the other hand, with Je fais de la soupe
[I’m making some soup] it's caught in a movement of particularization. So that two stages, if
I may say so, two immobile points of view fixed in the discourse can correspond, but at the
same time be drawn from two opposing signifieds of potentiality, from two opposing
movements of thought. Do you follow me?

Student: It seems significant to me that you have... [inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: Yes, otherwise it would slide, but you're absolutely right to add that, because I can
and watch the slide. And then I'll have new positions.

Student: Whereas for l’homme est fallible, there's no need to...

Deleuze: For l’homme est fallible, yes, but for l’homme que j’ai vu, there will also be an
infinity, an infinity of intermediaries between the origin and the end, and what constitutes the
origin of the movement of particularization will correspond to what constitutes the end of the

movement of generalization, and what constitutes the end of the movement of
particularization will correspond to what constitutes the origin of the movement of
generalization.

So, I'll just conclude. You see, we're beginning to get an approximation of what this
mysterious matter is. It is semiotically formed, but not linguistically formed. Linguistics is
uniquely determined and defined by the combinations of the sign and the signified of effect.
It refers to a correlate, pure matter in movement, pure thought-matter in movement. I would
almost say, unity of matter, thought and movement, which is the signified of potentiality, and
which, for its part, is not linguistically formed, but is semiotically formed since it is defined
by processes. Except that these processes that have strictly nothing to do with processes of
language or language systems. Yeah? We'll see that, what's more, it will perform a similar
operation on time. It's no coincidence that here we have the case of movement-image, with
the verb. We're going to have the case of a time-image which, in turn, will be treated
semiotically, and not linguistically.

So, we're getting close to this… No. My conclusion is, indeed, no, it is not a proto-language.
No, the cinematographic image as movement-image and time-image is neither a language
system as semiocritique would have it, nor a language as the pioneers said, nor a language of
reality, except in a very particular sense, which is perhaps Pasolini's, because the language of
reality is precisely this semiotically formed and non-linguistically formed matter. If that's
what it is, then we must speak of a language of reality. But what becomes awkward is the use
of the word “language”. In fact, it's an a priori condition, a condition by right, of language
and language systems. You can see why language presupposes it, all language and language
systems presuppose it, since it will operate, precisely, its grasp, its instantaneous grasp on –
according to the context, that is, according to the operations of syntagm and paradigm – its
grasp on the signified of potentiality. But the signified of potentiality has absolutely nothing,
nothing at all to do with syntagmatic and paradigmatic operations.

Is that all clear? I absolutely need you to understand... you don't know how much. Whew.
Yes? We can't take it anymore, can we? I can't take it anymore. Yes, go ahead.

Student: Couldn't we, analogically, do the same thing with types of discourse?

Deleuze: On the... ah yes, everything, you can do everything. I mean, I mean with this
schema, he gave himself... there, it's still a schema, and once again, according to, the schema
will change each time.

Student: ... direct, indirect...

Deleuze: It's obvious, it's obvious, it's... ah, yes, but here, it would be part of persons, it would
be part of persons more than articles, it would be part of personal pronouns. It would be part
of the movement of personal pronouns, a signified of potentiality specific to the personal
pronoun. [End of recording; 2:48:08]

Notes

    Cfr. Communications 15, 1970. See session 14.

2
  The first example comes from the play "Chantecler", the second is the poem "La haine du soleil".
  See session 22 of Cinema seminar 3, June 12, 1984.
  On the transformation of the baker and Resnais, see session 22 of the Cinema 3 seminar. See also The TimeImage, pp. 119– 122, and page 301 note 31 (notably the reference to Prigogine and Stengers). More generally,
see L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze, "N comme neurologie", as well as Pourparlers (Paris: Minuit, 1990), pp.
168-172.
  On Perrault and Rouch, see sessions 12 and 13.
  On Shirley Clarke, see The Time-Image, pp. 153-154.
  See sessions 1 and 2 of the Cinema 3 seminar, November 8 and 22, 1983.
  See Cocorico Monsieur Poulet.
  See Pasolini, Heretical Empiricism, Washington: New Academia Publishing, 2005.
   On Pasolini's remarks, see The Movement-Image, p. 27, and in particular The Time-Image, pp. 28-29. See also
session 8 of the Cinema 3 seminar, January 17, 1984.
   On these processes, see The Time-Image, pp. 27-28, 39, 210-211, 276-278.
   The shot Deleuze refers to here appears in Hitchcock’s Frenzy (1972).
   On the interior monologue, see The Time-Image, pp. 29-30, 159, 167, 173, 182, 211, 241. See also seminars
sessions 1, 2, 8 and 9.
   June-July 1970. Deleuze quotes this in The Time-Image, p. 286, note 9.
   See C. Metz, Film Language: A Semiotics of the Cinema, Chicago: Chicago UP, 1991.
   See Gustave Guillaume, Foundations for a Science of Language, Amsterdam: John Benjamin’s Publishing
Company, 1984.
   In the relevant passages, where Deleuze speaks of a signifié de puissance, the English translation of
Guillaume, avoiding the terminology of Saussurian linguistics, refers to a “containing or annexing power”. We
have kept to Deleuze’s version, translated here as “signified of potentiality”, in preference to The Time-Image’s
rendering of it as “signified of power”.
   Since articles function differently in English, for the following discussion on definite and indefinite articles
we retain Deleuze’s French examples.
   We have omitted a recording fragment, approximately 55 seconds, that actually belongs in the following
sessions.