1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema and Thought, 1984-1985

Lecture 03, 13 November 1984 (Cinema Course 69)
Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Julien Denoual (1st part), Julien Quelennec (2nd part),
et Laura Cecilia Nicolas (3rd part); additional revisions to the transcription and time
stamp, Charles J. Stivale

English Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1

... because, on the one hand, there were some of you asking me to go back over specific
points, that’s one thing. And another thing: I wasn't happy at all last time, because I got a bit
carried away and mixed everything up. I mixed up too many things. It's not that I don't trust
you to separate them out, but now you’ll have no reason not to think that Kant and RobbeGrillet are the same thing, or even worse... So, I'd also like to tidy things up a bit. And then,
I'd like to move on, and if you have the patience, just for today as we move along, to do a
little bit of mathematics – not much, since I'm like you – but a bit of mathematics that I'll
very much need for the future. So, this session’s going to be both an austere and varied one.
Okay.

The first thing I've been asked to come back to… and here, I want to be very brief but... it
was when I posed the problem that we're going to be tackling this year, when I said very
quickly… well, thought has always presupposed an image of thought that preceded any
method, that is, that pre-existed any method, by which I mean that it pre-existed any explicit
approach to thought. It presupposes its own image. And as I was saying, our problem is really
this: under what conditions does an encounter between the automatic image and the image of
thought take place, and in what form? Given that "automatic image" seemed to me the most
general definition of the cinema image.

And it's in terms of this that, to consider our question regarding the relation between thought
and cinema, I said, well, it's a question of knowing in what way the automatic image and the
image of thought come together, and that's where we started. So, the question would be… --
Could we have a little more light? That's great. -- The question I'd like to come back to very
quickly is: in what way does any method, any explicit exercise of thought, presuppose an
image of thought? And, as I was saying, the image of thought that is presupposed is what we
could call, borrowing the word from [Mikhail] Bakhtin, what we could call a chronotope, that
is, a space-time.

And what I want to tell you is this… a method, any method, any method of thinking, insofar
as it guides the thought process, has two aspects: a spatial aspect and a temporal aspect. In its
temporal aspect, it distributes the before and after. But in what time would this be? That's
already saying too much... in what time, according to what time? Everyone knows that times

                                                                                                2

are infinitely variable. That doesn't prevent a method from distributing in terms of a time = x
what comes before and what comes after in relation to that time. And in all methods, you find
this problem. For example, this very problem will find its definition, its name, under the
general heading of what is called “an order of reasons”. Which is to say, it's not necessarily a
before and after chronologically speaking. It's the order of reasons. And the first definition of
method is that method is an order of reasons, and as you well know, philosophers… they
don't have the same method. What does that mean? Well, it means they don't have the same
order of reasons. It doesn't mean that they don't have the same reasons. Before having or not
having the same reasons, they don't have the same order of reasons.

For example, they don't start from the same point. The question “Where do I begin?” in
philosophy has always been a crucial question. Where do I begin? From where do I start? On
this point, we're told that philosophers are always disagreeing with one another, their
approaches vary. Some tell us this, others tell us that. This vision of the history of philosophy
is extremely sad, dark and gloomy. It's not certain that... Because we forget the question: But
where do such differences come from? And why do we forget the question: Where do such
differences come from? They don't have the same method. Why don't they have the same
method? No doubt, we have to go back to something presupposed. Namely, if they don't have
the same method, it's because a method is used to solve problems.

But they don't have the same problems. I'm scandalized by how we never reproach a scientist
for having a different problem from another scientist, but nonetheless people criticize
philosophers for having different problems. Personally, I've never seen anyone who has the
same problem as someone else coming up with different solutions, I've never seen that. If you
have the same problem as Kant, don't break your head over it, go and look at Kant. He has
solved your problem. All right, then. But it may be the case that you have problems that
haven’t yet been identified. At which point, it's up to you to solve them.

But otherwise, I see as much rigor in the philosophical solution to a problem as in the
scientific solution. However, in my view, you can't do everything at once. You can't give the
solution you think is right and at the same time state what the problem you're trying to
resolve is. Maybe this problem can't even be articulated. Perhaps it can only be inferred from
its solutions, and this happens also in mathematics. In saying this, I just want you to be able
to intuit that what I call "image of thought" is a problematic field, and that every method
presupposes a problematic field.

So, method presents itself as an order of reasons and is therefore temporal. Take an example
like Descartes' Metaphysical Meditations. It goes without saying that the novelty of this text
remains absolutely eternal, if only because of its unusual and varied use of the word “I”.
What does this “I” mean? The “I” that constantly appears in Descartes' Meditations has
thirty-six meanings, maybe forty meanings. To read the Meditations is to ask yourself… and
he's not going to tell you every time, he's not going to say be careful, I'm using “I” in the
sense of... it's up to you as a reader to work it out. To make a list of the various meanings of
the word “I” in Descartes' Meditations. That would be a very nice subject for a dissertation or
thesis. To the best of my knowledge, it's never been done. Okay.

But Descartes, who is writing a book on method, continues to insist on this point: what's
essential in the Meditations is – keep note of this – what comes before and what comes after.
Follow the order. Follow the order of the reasons, he says. What I say in the first meditation,

                                                                                                3

what I say in the second, what I say in the third... not that they are in contradiction. And he
says, if you don't follow the order of the reasons in terms of the before and after, well, he
says, you won’t understand my thought. So, some of the objections I get regarding the second
meditation make no sense at all, because they refer to a problem I can only pose in the fourth.
An order of reasons. I would say that a method has this temporal aspect, an order of reasons:
the before and after. That is, distribution, distribution of reasons according to the before and
after, meaning as the contents of a temporality. In other words, there is an extremely
profound relation between time and thought.

But I would also say that method has another aspect, a spatial aspect. What is this other
spatial aspect? It’s that here too it presupposes a space. Just as every method presupposes a
time that it fills with the order of reasons, it presupposes a space that it fills with a
distribution of its own, a methodical distribution. In my view, what this distribution in space
or this "filling" of space – of mental space, thought-space – implies, a distribution performed
by the method, is no longer the order of a before and after, but the determination of goals,
means and obstacles.

What is the goal? Everyone knows, the goal is the truth. You might say: it’s not certain. It’s
not certain, I’m not so sure. But yes. Yes, it is. We just have to be clear what we mean on this
point. Because when I say that the goal is the truth, I've said absolutely nothing, so nothing is
compromised. It doesn't compromise anyone. What are the means? I can see that the means
vary according to the methods. It’s odd. There are some methods according to which the truth
will always be inferred. Beginning from something, I conclude something else according to
rules that assure me of the truth of what I conclude. According to other methods, truth will
refer to and be attained by means of intuition. And what do we mean by intuition? There’s
nothing mysterious about the word. It means presence. I'm contrasting inference and intuition
here, if you like. Inference means: you conclude from what is given, something that is not
given. Whereas with intuition you make the thing itself appear. Right. Obstacles, well, that
would be the set of things – whatever they may be – that stand in the way of obtaining...
[Recording interrupted] [12:53]

... fills a space by determining goals, means and obstacles. This is just to help you sense
that… Okay, okay… but what I call the “image of thought” is the chronotope, that is, a spacetime. And where does this space-time come from? I would say that the image of thought is
the space-time it presupposes and in which it evolves. This is what will be filled in by the
method. This space-time is very concrete, you know. It's like a little philosophical novel. I
mean, it’s not something you can find in philosophers' texts, because it's presupposed. It's
presupposed by everything they say. And yet, everything they say evokes it. Everything they
say brings it to life.

Let’s take three examples. Let's suppose that Plato, Descartes and Kant all want to know the
truth. Okay. What I see is that they pursue it using three very different methods. I note how
Plato, among others, expounds at length on a method he calls "dialectical", which consists in
dividing… in dividing the concept into two halves, into two parts, choosing the part most
appropriate to the problem under consideration, while knowing that this in turn will then be
divided, and so on.

I note that Descartes proceeds quite differently in his own attempt to arrive at the truth that he
wants. He deploys a method that he presents as "analytical". This time, the starting point will

                                                                                                      4

be the clear and distinct perception of something which will then raise itself to the clear and
distinct perception of the cause of that thing. Okay, so here the linkage of clear and distinct
perceptions will form the order of reasons.

I note that Kant summons yet another method, a third method. Each invents his own method.
Let's suppose that he calls this third method “transcendental”. It consists in starting from a
particular thing and in asking ourselves under what conditions this thing is possible. This
time, it's a question of going back from a thing to the conditions that make it possible. And
this is a new method that establishes, above all as a principle of method, the search for the
conditions that make something possible. Under what conditions is this possible? Under what
conditions is mathematics possible? Fine. This is all very abstract. They all want to know the
truth through three different methods.

And at the same time... Okay, I’ll try to recount this like a story. Imagine someone who says
to themselves: it's amazing, the claims we make. Everyone makes all kinds of claims. And
they won't just say it regarding others, they'll also include themselves in this. Everyone makes
a claim of some kind. No matter what you say, there's always someone who will say: Ah
well, actually that was me. This is all very well, thinking one can live like that. We're stunned
by these claims. Those who make such claims have a name: they're called claimants. You can
claim a lot of things. You can claim a woman's hand. You can claim to have wisdom. You
can claim to be mad. Anything you want, no matter what. You can claim to know the truth.
And so, there you have it. A world full of claimants.1

Can I justify this? No, I’ve no desire to justify it. How can I put it? It's – try to feel this – it's a
chronotope. In what sense is this a chronotope? It implies a whole space, a whole time, a
whole space-time that will be the space-time of claims. Where do the claimants live? How do
they live? It's up to the claimants to compete. This implies a particular space: the space of
rivalry. Each one saying: I’m the one! I’m the one! For each, there will undoubtedly be a
favorable moment when they can say: I’m the one! Maybe it's not good to be the first
claimant. Maybe it's better to let the other go first. We can very well imagine this sort of
chronotope of the claimant. Well, okay.

I would say that this was the way in which Plato experienced the Greek world. What's more,
it was the way he experienced Athenian democracy. It came to him through myth. I mean,
[Homer's] Odyssey is a famous story of claimants. But it's not the myth that interests him.
What interests him is something that sets his mind racing. He makes Socrates say it several
times: no one would claim to be a cobbler. There are cobblers, and I'm not a cobbler, and I
don't claim to be one. And he says, but in politics, that’s not the way it is – and this disturbs
him. In politics, everyone will say: I'm good at politics. And he asks why this is. In a sense,
this is the crux of Plato's whole problem: if we want to find the truth, we need to find a way
to select the claimants. He says, this is the chronotope, and then it becomes his problem. And
this is a question of lived experience. It's lived thought. How do you select the claimants?
How do you know which is the right claimant? It's a question that might be posed by a father.
They ask for my daughter's hand, but who is the right claimant? So, there are some who will
develop their thought in this sense, but that will be after Plato. Because Plato was… But they
won’t develop it in the same terms.

Yet this is exactly what Neoplatonism is all about. One, two, three. What is this one, two,
three? One is the given instance. In the Neoplatonist triad, one is the given instance, two is

                                                                                                     5

what can be given, three is the claimant. That is, justice, the quality of being just, those who
claim to be just. If Plato uses a method he calls “dialectical”, which consists in dividing the
concept into two halves, taking one of these halves and dividing it again, you can't understand
him, you can only understand him abstractly. At which point, you might say to me: how
tedious. But if you re-establish the image that is presupposed by this, it will be the question of
how to select the claimants. And this concerns philosophers, you see, because philosophers
claim to have the truth. But they're not the only figures who do this. As Plato says, there are
the Sophists, there are the Rhetoricians, there are the Orators who say: No! I’m the one who
holds the real truth! They are claimants. According to Plato, we will have to separate them
out, we will have to establish tests for selecting them. And it was Socrates, in Plato’s view,
who invented this method for sorting out the claimants.

At this point, Plato's “I want the truth” takes on a very concrete meaning. His “I want the
truth” means that he doesn’t want to be tricked by false claimants. That's his chronotope. I
don't want to be deceived. They won't trick me. Hence the ambiguity of Socrates' character,
all his modesty, all his feigned modesty, all his evasions. He wants to get others to betray
themselves. And he always invokes the idea of the test, like testing a vase or testing gold. It's
all linked to this idea of claims. There are things that claim to be gold coins. So, at that point
you have to do certain tests to find out if they’re gold or not. And he says that the same
applies in the case of souls. It's not enough to say: I'm a philosopher. It's not even enough to
say: I hate philosophy. You have to undergo this testing of claims.

If I try to sum up the image of thought as it appears in Socrates and Plato, I'd say it's of the
type… it's very simple, it's of the type: I don't want to be tricked! And this is what his
wanting the truth consists in. I don't want to be tricked. Who, who, who wants to trick me?
Don't you see – poor guy – that there are claimants everywhere? The claimants are besieging
me! I'm Penelope. Well, Penelope's got one trick up her sleeve, and that's the bow. There'll be
a test of drawing the bow to determine who is the right claimant. This is a chronotope.

Okay, let's proceed. Many centuries have passed, and we have Descartes. But he presents us
with a completely different method. He who wants to know the truth. All right, all right, he
wants to know the truth. But Descartes has another idea, one that is arguably more modest.
But to speak in terms of modesty makes no sense here. It's no longer “I don't want to be
deceived”, now it's “I don't want to deceive myself”. I don't… I don't want to deceive myself.
For Descartes, it's not so much the claimants... there's this whole aspect in Descartes: Yes,
there are people who deceive us, for example Scholasticism deceives us. But for Descartes,
when all is said and done, if we let ourselves be deceived... no, sorry, if we are deceived, it's
because we let ourselves be deceived. In other words, we deceive ourselves. We deceive
ourselves. And we would never be deceived if we didn't spend all this time deceiving
ourselves.

You feel how this is another chronotope. Yet it's a common place... and here I call upon… I
think there are philosophical characters. You have to distinguish between a psychological
character and a philosophical character. The ideal is to no longer have a psychological
character and to have only a philosophical character. This ideal is rarely fulfilled. Those who
no longer have a psychological character are called the great philosophers. In Kantian terms,
we would say that you must no longer have an empirical character, you should only have a
transcendental character. But then, it's hard to renounce all character, it's hard to trample on
one’s character. This is the ultimate task. At least, this is the task philosophy invites you to

                                                                                                  6

complete. Ceasing to have character is the only way to become an event. I don't mean a
historical event, because a historical event isn't interesting. But it's the only way to become
like a movement of air. That's good, that's philosophical character.

Well, yes, Descartes says, of course people, and maybe even God... why shouldn't God be a
trickster? And in the Meditations he goes through, following the order of reasons – that is,
following a before and an after – he goes through two formidable hypotheses: the hypothesis
of the evil demon and the hypothesis of the deceiving God. Hypothesis one: there is an evil
demon who deceives us. Second hypothesis: God himself would be deceitful. It's not the
same hypothesis, there's an order of reasons we have to follow, but it goes from bad to worse.
So, he acknowledges the possibility that there are powers that deceive us. But for him, a
power that deceives us is always the avatar of an act by which I deceive myself, and his
problem is why.

I would say that it sounds modest to say, “I deceive myself, I’m wrong”. But it’s not!
Understand what is on Descartes' mind. He doesn't say it, he doesn't need to say it. It's up to
us to say it for him. The other fellow, Plato, was saying how there are all these claimants. I
don't want to be deceived by them! Descartes, on the other hand, isn't interested in that. He's
only secondarily interested in the fact that there are claimants who deceive us. What interests
him is that when I'm wrong, this is still a way of thinking. That's his thing. That's what he
always says. But what he's saying here is very concrete: whether you're wrong or not, you’re
still thinking. Because to be wrong is still to think.

As a result, there's only one thing you can't be wrong about, and that’s when you say “I
think”. Why? Because to be wrong is still to think. If to be wrong is to think, you can't be
wrong when you say “I think”. Now, that's very interesting. The “I'm wrong” is not a
declaration of modesty. It's the only way he can posit error and conceive of error as a way of
thinking. From then on, his entire method will be based on this. What is the first certainty?
The first certainty is that I think. The proof that I think is that I'm wrong.

You can see that the transition from “I am deceived” to “I'm wrong” allows him to discover
error as a mode of thought. And this is what his whole method presupposes. Descartes' entire
order of reasons will start from this and give rise to the Meditations. So, it's very important
for him not to live like Plato. Plato's image of thought was: “I am deceived”, or “Penelope is
deceived”. Descartes' image of thought is: “I’m wrong, I deceive myself”. It's a question of
life experience, okay.

I selected these three examples, and it’s not by chance. I could go on, but I've had enough. I
chose three because they go well together. You could invent others if you want. These are
what I was referring to as “cries”. Cries are in fact the utterances of chronotopes. There are
claimants. How can we distinguish between the claimants? This is a cry. It's a philosophical
cry. The rest is a question of concepts. I don’t mean to say that concepts derive from cries.
What I'm saying is that, in any case, concepts presuppose cries. Once again, it's the cry-song
relation that is fundamental, both to the animal world and to the philosophical world. Yes, it's
not enough to cry out to do philosophy, because this crying out, these cries are a complicated
business after all.

                                                                                                  7

So, the third is something you can invent yourself. When I take Kant as an example, his
business, his concern – because it really is someone's concern, the concern of a way of
thinking, a form of thought which has its own concerns… Your thought is what concerns
you, what you have to deal with. You have to find it yourself. No one will find it for you.
And once you've found what you have to deal with – perhaps you're only half-aware of it –
well, at that point, you're a philosopher. You're a philosopher, I think that's the... you're a
philosopher, even if what concerns you isn't strictly philosophical.

But people who have discovered what their concerns are, what they have to deal with, are
rare. I think they’re very rare. They brighten up the day. People would be a lot happier if they
knew what their real concerns were, what they have to deal with. So, there are things we can
ask ourselves: can we deal with, in the literal sense of “dealing with” – again this would refer
to analyses of presuppositions – can we deal with death? My whole philosophical character
denies that death can be a concern and that we can deal with death. Only the neurotic is
concerned with death. But the neurotic doesn't know what he's dealing with. Yet there are
great philosophers who have thought that death is a matter of concern, in other words, that
thought has something to do with it. It's possible, then, but these are infinite tasks.

But I think that… in this third case, what can he say, since he no longer says, “I am
deceived”, nor does he say, “I’m wrong”? You can already see that in both cases, “to want to
know the truth” has two meanings. By itself, wanting to know the truth means nothing.
Wanting to know the truth all depends on what you place beneath it. We've just seen that, for
Plato, “wanting to know the truth” means wanting not to be deceived by false claimants.
Now, that does mean something. Okay. But if that isn’t your problem, you won’t be seeking
the truth in that way. Descartes too wants to know the truth. But it's not surprising that he
discovers another truth. Why would you be surprised if Descartes disagrees with Plato, when
they don't pose the same problem? It would be surprising if they did agree. You might say: so
at least let them solve their own problems. Well, they can't solve their own problems. And
why can't they solve their own problems? Because what is true or false is a solution. A
problem, by definition, is neither true nor false. It is either well or badly posed. Fine. But it's
not... I can always define the truth of a solution by the fact that it performs the cases of the
problem.

But I can't define the truth of the problem as such. I can define other aspects of the problem.
To say well or badly posed is too vague. Interesting. Important, in the sense Kierkegaard
intended when he said: the important, the interesting, are categories of philosophy. You can
read pages, countless pages sometimes, and it’s not that they’re wrong. They're just
uninteresting. They are not interesting. There's nothing you can do about it. But if someone
says to you: “Oh, really? Tell me, tell me why!” Then we get annoyed. It's hard to say why
something isn't interesting. I can explain how something may be false. It’s pleasant to do that,
but those are rare moments. But to explain why something isn't interesting... yes, it's not very
interesting, hard to read, hard to prove. It can’t be proved. Because it's botched. Not lived.
Not lived. Well, that’s too bad. It wasn't your concern. You meddled in what had nothing to
do with you, or you don't believe it yourself.

So, Kant, Kant! He was a product of the Reformation. We could always find sociological
factors. I was saying that in Plato's case, the sociological factor is Athenian democracy. It's
the Greek polis. It's the world of claimants. In Kant’s case, you could say, well, this was how
the Reformation went. It's no longer like saying: I am deceived, I don't want to be deceived.

                                                                                                  8

No, that’s not Kant... But neither is Kant saying I'm always wrong, and I don't want to be
wrong anymore. That's not him either. Because Kant learned moral rigor. And when he says
“I want to know the truth”, he says something that would never have occurred to the other
two. He's saying: I don't want to deceive, and nothing will… and I'll stand firm on this,
nothing will make me deceive. We must bow to the appearance in philosophy of the moral
creature, the moral species.

You may say, but everyone who has a shred of morality would say what Kant said. Yes, but
no, but no, but no! They say things like Kant, of course. Everyone says things like Kant!
Everyone says things like Descartes! Everyone says things like Plato! They say everything at
once. But what is your main concern? Is your concern, by virtue of your philosophical
character, “I don't want to be deceived”, or is it “I don't want to deceive myself”,2 or is it “I
don't want to deceive”? It's because it's not at all the same thing, it's not at all the same way of
living your relationship with truth. “I don't want to deceive”. What a strange idea.

So, we had to wait for the Reformation, for Kant… yes, we had to wait for the Reformation.
You may ask, but what could the deceivers do at the time of the Reformation? Of course,
there are just as many deceivers as before. But even the deceiver will be forced to say, “I
don't want to deceive”. He'll have to pass through this new language. “I don't want to
deceive”. And why, why? What is new about this? You can sense the chronotope. It's enough
for me to say, this is it, this is it... In philosophy, you must realize that even the most
everyday proposition can commit you. As another philosopher says: you’re committed, you're
embarked.3 You think you are saying something innocent, even self-evident. But from the
moment you discover your own concern, nothing is self-evident. Nothing. Nothing is open to
discussion. In philosophy you will never argue. Nothing can be taken for granted. Nothing is
the same.

I don't want to deceive. How curious, how strange it sounds, I don't want to deceive.
Understand, it's the subordination of knowledge to morality. In more technical terms, it's the
subordination, as Kant would say, of speculative reason to practical reason. “I don’t want to
deceive” does indeed engender the search for truth, meaning the operation of knowing, but
strictly subjects it to a practical moral purpose. This reversal is one of the many Kantian
reversals, namely it is no longer morality or the Good that depends on knowledge – in the
sense that the wise man is virtuous, the one who knows is virtuous – but a radical reversal
takes place in which knowledge is subordinated to a higher aim, the aim of moral reason.
Subordination of the first Critique to the second Critique, that is, of the Critique of Pure
Reason to the Critique of Practical Reason.

So why doesn't he want to “deceive”? He has an idea, an idea he has barely glimpsed, and it
will take the whole of his method to develop it explicitly through all his books. And this idea,
if I were to try to sum it up, amounts to saying: only beings that do not deceive are free and,
as free beings, constitute an intelligible nature. The language I’m using here is one that
would be unintelligible to a non-philosopher but I'm doing it on purpose. “Only moral beings
constitute an intelligible nature”. This is quite new. In other words, intelligible nature is no
longer constituted by “essence”, as Plato would have said, it consists of the community of
moral beings. It is they who constitute an intelligible nature, everything is transformed, and
so on. Ultimately, they no longer deploy the same language, but you must understand that
everything begins with a shift in the image of thought: I don't want to deceive.

                                                                                                9

So, I insist on this point, well, and then there would be a series of consequences to this. There
would be a whole series, but no matter. Yet it goes without saying that here I've taken three
different cases, three philosophers, three different images of thought. And it's not in terms of
their methods, it's the other way round. You can't understand their methods, you can’t
understand the development and linkage of their concepts? The concepts simply fill a mental
space-time according to the order of before and after and to the order of goals, means and
obstacles. But all this refers back to a prior spatio-temporal image. You must draw, you
must sketch out the geography of this prior image. You need to draw the map of this
preliminary image, that is, of this continent. It's not the same continent. The person who
stands up and says: I don't want to be deceived; the one who stands up and says: I don't want
to be wrong; and the one who stands up and says: I don't want to deceive – these three cases
don’t inhabit the same space-time.

So it's in this sense… I don't know if the person who was asking me… if I answered the
person who wanted me to explain a bit further on this point, but I really can’t go on with
this… In any case, my point is this: you see what I mean by this image of thought that preexists the explicit exercise of thought.

This year, I'll be taking this up again, so as to bridge things, so that you’ll have a better
understanding when I say, well: there is indeed an image of thought. Thought cannot function
without presupposing an image of itself. Okay. Well, my topic for this year, once again, is:
given the very particular characteristics of the cinematographic image, what is its relationship
with the image or images of thought? Has it had an effect on the image we have of thought?
And if so, in what sense? Which image?

This is what we have begun to look for. And as I was saying, my whole topic at the beginning
was precisely this: given that the most general characteristic of the cinematographic image is
that it is automatic, and that the fact of its automatism is what distinguishes it from the
pictorial image, the photo… the photographic image, and from all other images… well, how
could the automatic image not encounter, in ways yet to be specified, the double automatism
pertaining to the image of thought, that is, psychological automatism and logical automatism?

We had seen, in fact, that the image of thought comprised two automatisms: the
psychological and the logical, which are quite different from one another. So, we found
ourselves with this set of problems, and we began by saying: Yes, but be careful, there are
mutations, there have been mutations in the image of thought. And I've just given some
examples of these mutations. And that was as far as we'd got when, last week, I got a bit
confused and launched into elaborations that were hard to follow, or at least so it seems to
me.

So, to finish with these recaps, I've already wasted a lot of time... I hope there's no problem,
is it all clear? Good. Comtesse told me he wanted to go back to a point from when we started.
Isn't he here? Yes, he's here… is he here? Do you want to take up a point from the start?
You’re not going to smoke, are you? You can smoke later in the courtyard.

Georges Comtesse: There are two points I'd like to pick up on from your first remarks on Élie
Faure, when you spoke of the pioneers of cinema, and therefore of the new image of thought.
And then, another point regarding Eisenstein, and what occurred concerning cinema and

                                                                                                10

thought in the famous 1935 congress where Eisenstein was subjected to the tribunal of
socialist reason.

On the first point, concerning Élie Faure, I'd like to say that, according to the writings of Élie
Faure, when it comes to cinema, we can very well maintain that according to this pioneer –
since this was the word you used – cinema is a revolution in thought, or a new image, or a
new way of thinking… But we can just as well say, referring to Élie Faure, we can just as
well say that cinema is the return to an old way of thinking, despite the difficulty, or
sometimes almost the impossibility, of reviving this old way of thinking. Because what
interests Élie Faure in this relation between thought and cinema is precisely a certain
catastrophe. And to take up, for example, the terms you used in reference to Bakhtin, we
could say that in the metaphysical chronotope, meaning the space-time of metaphysical
thought, it's the catastrophe that interests him.

And from this, he forges an idea of cinema which reconducts, recomposes and recreates
metaphysical values, through a kind of reconstruction of the chronotope that has collapsed.
The chronotope is no longer the very singular thought of Elie Faure. The chronotope is no
longer the constituent, or even constitutive dimension of thought, which would reduce to a
secondary role for example, the steps, the road, the path, the methods, the methodology. For
what is lost, what is undone, says Elie Faure, what collapses is the very indivisibilty of spacetime, that is, the unity of man, the sense of man's being, the presence of the mind of being in
motion, or else, as he puts it, "the form of movement as a form of life". And what comes
undone with this collapse of the chronotope of metaphysical thought is the very pathway that
sustained the whole content of that metaphysical thought. The pathway, he says, accords
neither with expression, nor with gesture, nor with being, nor with the form of man in
movement. So, for Élie Faure, the first time is literally a collapse, a catastrophe of the
chronotope of metaphysical thought. The catastrophe of the chronotope is what he calls “this
monstrous negation of unity”. It precipitates into this collapse of the metaphysical
chronotope, it literally precipitates into what Élie Faure calls – and this is a very important
notion for him – “the inertia of the nocturnal universe”.

The end of metaphysics, then, would involve a precipitation into “the inertia of the nocturnal
universe”. And this is a universe without space-time, without movement, without thought of
being or life. So that, from then on, for example, it could be said that in Élie Faure’s
discovery of the catastrophe of the chronotope and its precipitation into a certain universe…
for Élie Faure cinema, in a sense, can no longer be what it was, for example, for [Louis]
Delluc, for [Ricciotto] Canudo or for [Léon] Moussinac – that is, the first great critics of the
French school.

Cinema, for example, is no longer as it is in Delluc's work, “the uprooting from the chaos of
mud” or “the elevation of the complete Whole to the light” – these are Delluc's own
expressions. It is no longer, as with Canudo, “the visual miracle” or “the expression of
luminous life in movement”. It is no longer, as with Moussinac, the support... [Recording
interrupted] [58:21]

Part 2

                                                                                                 11

Deleuze: Oh, you're some way ahead of us, because I only alluded to this famous text from
1935, and indeed, the moment will come for me to try and comment on it. And you told us
how you interpret it. I must admit that I wanted to stop where I did, because it was the only
part that interested me, but the part you’re referring to, I’m sure you won’t forget and you can
save it for later, because I don't quite see it the way you do, this text from... this discussion,
this business of the 1935 speech.

But what you said about Élie Faure is very interesting. And I wondered whether you were
aiming to… or whether it only seemed to me that you wanted to draw him out… As you put
it quite broadly, there's a certain aspect the great writers or critics before the war have in
common in their thinking about cinema. And if we try to characterize this common aspect, it
seems to me that in certain respects, you wanted to remove Élie Faure from this community
of thinkers, in saying: No, no, with Élie Faure, there's something exceptional. And from some
of your formulas or quotations, I was thinking that you were attempting to transform him into
a precursor of what is happening now. And yet, at the same time, it seemed to me, on the
contrary, that what you were saying was along the lines of: Of course, Élie Faure, with a very
profound originality, was thinking through this pre-war cinema, and giving pre-war cinema a
particular status, notably in relation to catastrophe. Is "catastrophe" his word or yours?

Comtesse: He uses the word "collapse".

Deleuze: I knew it. Yeah, I was sure. I couldn't quite sort out what was yours and what was
his.

Comtesse: He uses the word...

Deleuze: But “collapse”… is this the word he uses? Is that right?

Comtesse: He says, “this monstrous negation of unity”.

Deleuze: Of course, "catastrophe" sounded odd to me. When you want to make this kind of
intervention, if you don’t mind, I'd like you to come with the precise text and quote from it.
One could say the same thing to me, but the difference is that I'm ready to quote. Because
there are some specific words, whose context I’d like to know. Where does this business
about the night come from?

Comtesse: About what?

Deleuze: The night.

Comtesse: It’s “inertia”, not night.

Deleuze: Yes, yes, but there was a sentence… I don’t know if it was yours or his?

Comtesse: The inertia of the nocturnal universe… [Indistinct remarks as to reference]

                                                                                                  12

Deleuze: Yes, do you have the page there? Can you tell me next time? Because it was very
interesting, but what was it exactly? Was it to show that he had thought about pre-war cinema
with a particular force, or was it to show that he was the precursor of a new cinema?

Comtesse: What strikes me as odd is precisely how we can imagine a collusion between a
certain philosophical thought and cinema. But exactly what philosophical thought?

Deleuze: Who's the “we” you’re referring to?

Comtesse: Well, the things you were saying…

Deleuze: Right, okay... No, no, it was just to find out who you had it in for. I can imagine...
No, no, no, I hear you. So, you think some people do that, you can imagine a kind of
collusion...

Comtesse: In other words, what interests me in what we refer to as cinematographic thought
is to problematize what we call the “encounter” between philosophical thought and the
thought of cinema. Because it seems to me that there's a way of thinking about cinema, and I
don't want to get into that, there's a filmic space of cinema, which cannot be assimilated by
any philosophical thought, whether it be metaphysical or perhaps even modern. There is
something that literally rebels against traditional philosophical thought, and indeed against a
certain kind of modern thought. And so, problematizing this encounter means, among other
things, speaking about Élie Faure, who thinks about cinema from a point of view that seems
to me to be highly traditional and quite ancient, and is not precisely a new form of thought.
And it seems to me that, even at the time he was writing this, there were films – if we analyze
certain films, or series of films, meaning if we re-establish their filmic space of translation –
which would exceed what critics have to say about cinema. It's this point of encounter that
I'm trying to problematize, it's precisely that. In what way is there something like a filmic
space that, when we re-establish it, if we can re-establish it, stands outside what may well be
critical restriction? And which is literally almost irreducible to what thinkers have thought so
far, that actually strongly challenges them?

Deleuze: You're exaggerating slightly, because there really is no difference between us on
this point. Strictly none.

Comtesse: It seems to me that almost nobody understands, from what I've read… almost
nobody understands what Godard is doing in his recent films, whether in Sauve qui peut (la
vie) [1979], Passion [1982], or Prénom Carmen [1983]. It seems to me that their thinking is
mired in either semiotic, literary or philosophical schemas, which literally prevent us from
thinking Godard's filmic strata... And it's exactly the same for Resnais.

Deleuze: Yes, yes, yes. Of course, it's not reducible to all that. We know this. I mean... I just
want to stress that I don't see who could disagree with what you say, when you speak about
there being something irreducible. But that would apply to anything. In philosophical
thought, there is something irreducible that the cinematographic image, by its very nature,
cannot grasp. And the same applies to musical thought, there's something in musical thought
that cinematographic thought, by its very nature, cannot grasp. Right, okay then. Well,
perhaps you all need a rest now? But not for long... [Recording interrupted] [1:05;52]

                                                                                                    13

... you see, I'm speaking very schematically. I'll resume our overall project. My overall
project is to say: yes, the war, and something even worse than the war, caused a certain
rupture in cinema. Therefore, we're mainly going to proceed by looking at pre-war cinema, to
see what image of thought it concerned, in terms of new thought, universal language, art of
the masses. You remember, that was one of our big topics. We saw in what way the war, and
worse, was able to call this cinema into question. And in modern cinema as it has come into
being, in post-war cinema as it has come into being, the same question arises: what is its
relation with a certain image of thought? To what extent do the two – the former
corresponding roughly to pre-war cinema, the latter corresponding to contemporary cinema –
to what extent do they differ, always keeping in mind our starting point, namely the
automatic character of the image, which remains valid for both moments?

But just as the automatic character of the cinema image has brought about an evolution of the
automaton, so too images of thought imply evolutions in the spiritual automaton. Okay. So
this is why we find ourselves jumping from certain philosophical perspectives to
cinematographic ones, and why last time, not only did I jump, I also splashed about. So,
basically, what I said was that, to remain with the image of thought, there have been… well,
we could point to four mutations, which don't exactly coincide with the pre-war and post-war
periods, but it was these four mutations that interested me and that I had begun to analyze in
terms of both the image of thought and cinema.

So, I will try to put the first of these in order. I was saying that the first, the first mutation, is
the substitution of belief for knowledge, and I invoked Kant's great phrase: “I had to deny
knowledge in order to make room for belief”. And I said, well, this is it. I don't mean to say
that something necessarily follows from this concerning cinema. What I am saying is that, at
a certain point perhaps, we might say to ourselves, well yes, that's where cinema comes in.
And so now I'd like to put in order what I said in such a disorderly manner. I would say that,
for a very long time, the image of thought had knowledge as its model. But what interests me
is: what does that imply? What does it mean to say that the image of thought has knowledge
as its model?

What I’d like to say on this point is something quite simple. I mean that the fundamental
characteristic of knowledge, I think, is the affirmation of a certain kind of conformity, naturespirit conformity, man-world conformity, thing-concept conformity – a kind of conformity in
the true sense of the term, which is to say, ultimately having the same form, or converging
towards the same form. So, what does this imply? It implies that, in a certain way, nature is
not indifferent to man, and man is not indifferent to nature, that there is a kind of complicity,
a conformity between man and the world, between nature and mind. I'm borrowing here – I
don't claim to be talking about cinema – I'm borrowing a famous formula of Eisenstein's:
“non-indifferent nature”. Non-indifferent nature is perhaps to be understood in a moral sense,
as Eisenstein says, a sad nature for sad men, but it also has a speculative meaning. Knowledge
is not possible if nature is indifferent to man, that is, if nature is indifferent to the operation
that claims to know it. There is a kind of nature-mind complicity that constitutes knowledge,
or as a condition of knowledge.4

Now, I believe that this image of thought as a model for knowledge takes shape at a precise
moment: it takes shape with Aristotle. In other words, it has a long history. It's a model of
knowledge, and Aristotle is undoubtedly the one who gives the notion of conformity its most
rigorous meaning, namely: what is knowledge, or what is knowing? It's to inform. So today,

                                                                                               14

we find ourselves returning to Aristotelianism through information technology. For Aristotle,
“information” has a very precise meaning: it's when things take form, in other words, it's the
act by which a form imposes itself on matter. And this is the first time in the history of
thought that knowledge will be defined as “information” in the strict sense of the term. So,
the conformity of nature and mind, of man and the world, is attained in information, as an
operation of knowing, or as knowledge.

Now, I don’t want to dwell on Aristotle's theses, although that would be fascinating. I'm just
trying to give you a kind of Aristotelian scent, a kind of Aristotelian atmosphere, especially
in the poetic distillation given to it by a very great poet who wrote the Thomistic Aristotelian
treatise, namely [Paul] Claudel. Claudel, in his splendid style, wrote a treatise he called Traité
de la co-naissance – co-naissance with a hyphen – au monde et de soi-même. It’s a marvelous
treatise, one of the things I'd like you to read for yourselves. And it's a treatise… a work of
literary genius, that is Aristotelian-Thomistic, and it presents itself as such. It's pure
Thomism, you know, Paul Claudel's Thomism. And what… what is its main theme? Well, it's
the idea that all birth [naissance] is co-birth [co-naissance]. We are born with. If you think of
the notion, the later notion of “being-in-the-world”, the phenomenological notion of “beingin-the-world”, remember that its Husserlian origin is shot through with scholasticism, that
Husserl is full, full of medieval notions, scholastic notions, and that the idea itself of “cobirth”, which appears with Aristotelianism, is fundamental in this respect.

To be born is to be born into the world, in other words, to be co-born [co-naître], and to be
co-born is to know [connaître]. This is the fundamental point of nature-mind, man-world,
thing-concept conformity. All birth is co-birth. All co-birth is knowledge [connaisance]. Why
and how? Because it is to become similar. It is to become similar. In a text in a style that is
pure Claudel, he ably sums up this idea of Aristotle and St. Thomas: “All sensation is birth.
All birth is co-birth. The animate being knows the similar in its co-birthing as similar.” 5

I am born as similar to the things that populate the world, to the other living beings that
populate the world. Being born, I am co-born [co-né], co-born, I know [connais] what is
similar, what is similar between other things and myself. Here we have an extremely
profound and nuanced operation, and I'd just like to leave it implicit. And indeed, in
Aristotle's case, what does this give us? Finally, in a certain way, everything, by virtue of the
fact that what is born, knows. And what does it know? All the things it undergoes, whose
effects it undergoes and on which it in turn exerts effects, meaning that to know is always to
take form. To know is to be informed and to inform. Brass knows the trumpet. Wood knows
the bed.6

In a no less splendid text, Claudel says – this is like Saint Thomas – “This knowledge can
assume the name of information, since its end is the production of a form. It is in this sense
that the sea knows the ship” – the sea knows the ship… – “the axe and the rock, they both
know the oak” – though not in the same way. The rock knows the oak and the axe knows the
oak… “the fire knows the food it cooks, the metal it melts down, and the Rome that it sets
ablaze.” 7 Beautiful! What great style, a very great style. All things that are co-born know one
another. And to be co-born is to assume form, to assume a form, to receive a form. Now,
since all matter already has a form, and we never arrive at a material that is truly raw, there is
a becoming of forms, a transformation of forms, which will constitute the process of
knowing.

                                                                                               15

Second stage: we reserve the word “knowledge”, in a more specific sense, for living beings.
This will be “knowledge of the senses”. And what is knowledge in relation to knowledge of
the senses? It's to receive sensible form, to receive the sensible form of what we know. It's to
become similar from the point of view of form. It's an admirable conception, I don't have
the... Hence the Thomist formula that you'll find in all the Thomists: “To know is to be”. To
know is to be what we know, from the point of view of form, obviously, since it's an
information theory. The soul, the animal soul, the sensitive soul, receives the sensible form of
the thing. The hand knows heat by its turning yellow. Sensitive form is quality. I'm
summarizing a great deal, there’s nothing technical in what I’m saying. I'm simply trying to
evoke an Aristotelian-Thomistic world. The eye only becomes color by coloring itself, an
idea dear to Aristotle. The hand knows heat only by warming up. It receives the sensible form
of the thing.

But there is a third stage: to know, in the sense of intelligible knowledge, no longer sensible
knowledge, but pure knowledge, intelligible, rational knowledge. Well, this time, the soul
receives the intelligible form of the thing. It receives it, meaning it is informed, you see? It's
always an operation of information. The only difference between Aristotle and the moderns is
that they don't conceive of information in the same way. But both will literally state that to
know is to be informed, or to inform. I receive the intelligible form of the thing, that is, no
longer the quality, but the essence, no matter what he calls essence, no matter what the
difference is here between essence and quality, otherwise we'd go on forever. But then things
get more complicated, because Aristotle defines a type of intellect that he calls the “passive
intellect”. And what is the passive intellect? It's the potential within us to receive all
intelligible forms.

But then there must also be an active intellect in the intellect itself – and this will be one of
the greatest mysteries of Aristotelian philosophy – there must be an active intellect, capable
of putting this power, this potentiality, into action, one that is capable of making the passive
intellect, the power to receive forms, the intelligible forms of things, realize this potentiality
and actually receive them. In other words, there is something in thought that pre-exists
thought. There is an active intellect, which is undoubtedly the separable part of ourselves,
namely the immortal part of the soul. All of this is what constitutes co-birth. So, I can say that
the model of knowledge is clearly founded by Aristotle's philosophy, as it was taken up by
Saint Thomas, in this form: a conformity of nature and mind, a conformity, a complicity of
man and the world, a complicity that finds its source in the notion of co-birth.

So of course, in this sphere of knowing or knowledge, well, there's a beyond and there's a
below. But that's not a problem. I mean, what is there beyond? Well, beyond it, there has to
be some kind of source for this complicity of mind-nature or man-world. This source will be
God, or the Good, the Sovereign Good. And beneath, what do we have? Beneath is the union
of soul and body. This is ultimately the sensory-motor link, the fact that, as Aristotle puts it
so well, sensation is not pure spectacle: movement joins up with sensation. And there you
have the complete model of knowledge, with the sphere of knowledge, its foundation in the
beyond, while beneath we have the union of soul and body, and the sensory-motor schema.

Second point. I'm skipping centuries because I'm drawing points... I'm looking for milestones.
I would say that when Kant launches his great formula, “to deny knowledge to make room
for belief,” what does he mean? Understand that it's very important if it's true, and if I may
say that the image of thought was… since Aristotle and St. Thomas, it was dominated by the

                                                                                               16

model of knowledge. And what I just did was to very roughly try to define or characterize
this domain of knowledge, this model of knowledge. But you see that what Kant is proposing
is a reversal. And how does he achieve this? Here again, I'm speaking about Kant in the same
way I did about Aristotle earlier, meaning that I'm saying certain things, but I'm not speaking
about them in a scholarly way.

He says: okay, knowledge concerns nature, but it only concerns sensible nature, it doesn’t
concern intelligible nature. But why not? Because information, the act by which we give form
to matter, only applies to sensible matter. Knowledge refers exclusively to sensible nature.
Which is not to say that knowledge comes from the senses. Kant doesn't think that at all. He
thinks that knowledge only applies to sensible nature. It only applies to sensible nature,
because only sensible matter can be informed. Informed by what? As you can see, here the
word “form” takes on a different meaning. It's no longer the “intelligible form” of something,
the essence. It's the form, or forms, of our thought. That is, only sensible nature can be
informed by the forms of our thought.

So, what are the forms of our thought? For example, substance, causality, meaning the
predicates, the most general attributes we assert about things. Now, these most general
attributes that we assert about things apply only to sensible things. If I say: “Everything has a
cause”, I inform the sensible by applying the category of causality to it. If I say: “Everything
is both one and many”, I inform the sensible by applying to it the categories of unity and
multiplicity.

So, there is knowledge, and to know is always to inform. At which point you'll say, he’s
sticking to the model of knowledge. No, because knowledge knows only sensible nature. So
there's a rupture between man and nature. From what point of view? Not just any point of
view, but from the point of view of knowledge, a break between man and nature from the
point of view of knowledge. But then, what about so-called intelligible nature, suprasensible
nature? We don't know it. We don't know it, and we cannot know it by definition. The
conditions of possibility of knowledge condemn knowledge to apply exclusively to the
phenomena of sensible nature. Suprasensible nature escapes knowledge. This is the great
Kantian break.

As you can see, this completely breaks with the Aristotelian model of intelligible forms.
There are no longer any intelligible forms. With Kant, what happens is that there are forms of
intelligence that apply, and only apply, to the sensible. From then on, there are no more
intelligible forms. Yet there is a suprasensible world. But why? How? Why say this, since we
don't know it and cannot know it? Because we can and must think it. A formidable
consequence: thought exceeds knowledge, and there are things we can think that do not
constitute any type of knowledge. Knowing is only one case. Knowing is only one kind of
thought. I can think the suprasensible world. What’s more, Kant will say, I must. And why
must I? I must, because I am a moral being. I won’t go back over this. Whatever his reasons
are, it’s because I'm a moral being. Why must I, as a moral being, think the suprasensible
world when I don't know it? Because suprasensible nature is the condition under which
moral beings constitute a community. And there is a community of rational moral beings.
Well, this is all very curious... You'll tell me it's odd but never mind, never mind. It's
strange... Okay.

                                                                                               17

So, you see now what the formula “to deny knowledge to make room for belief” means.
Knowledge does exist, but knowledge is only one mode of thought. That's something
completely new. Before this, all philosophers considered knowledge to be the model of
thought. For Kant, this is not at all that case. Knowing is only one way of thinking, and is
therefore subordinate to aims that are higher than thinking. Knowledge is no longer the
supreme end of thought.

In other words, thought as thought also includes the beliefs it entertains. You see how this is
very new, because the proponents of a revealed religion don't say that revelation implies
something higher than thought. Revelation makes me believe, makes my thought believe
something. But that's not what Kant means. It's thought that, in its being thought, generates
its own beliefs. It has beliefs, it is inseparable from beliefs, and in the end, it is knowledge
that is a special case of belief, and not at all the other way round.

Now, if you like, there is a double aspect to this. Firstly, I would say that the old nature-mind
conformity or, to be precise, the old man-world complicity, breaks down from the point of
view of knowledge, since intelligible nature is no longer knowable. Information is reduced
strictly to the sensible world. And in a more complicated way – I'd just like to say a few
words about this – there's a rupture in the sensory-motor schema. It's inevitable. You must
understand that the sensory-motor schema is nothing other than, at the level of soul and body,
the consequence of man-world complicity. In effect, a stimulus comes to me from the world
and I react to it: sensory-motor pattern. But there has to be a complicity between man and the
world. I believe that Kant was the first to question the pseudo-evidence of the sensory-motor
schema, because he completely shifted the problem. Our knowledge is reduced to the sensible
world.

So what happens then? A very odd thing happens: the sensible world appears – and this is
even its definition – it appears in space and time. It is what appears in space and time. Space
and time are the forms of our receptivity. We apprehend things in space and time. Space and
time are the forms of our receptivity. That's the first point.

Second point: we inform the sensible world as it appears to us in space and time. In other
words, we apply our categories or our ways of thinking to it. Our categories or ways of
thinking are the forms of our spontaneity or our activity. On one hand, the world appears to
us in the forms of our receptivity. On the other, we apply to it the forms of our activity. Kant
says: There's a mystery, there's a terrible mystery. And what is this? It's that the forms of our
receptivity and the forms of our activity are in conflict. These forms are alien to one another.
Space and time are the forms in which the world, the sensible world, appears to me.
Causality, unity, multiplicity and so on, are the forms of thought that I impose and by which I
inform the sensible world.

How do we explain that this nonetheless functions? I mean, how do we explain that the forms
of our receptivity and the forms of our spontaneity somehow fit together? Kant says simply
that it's a fact, that's the way things are. What's more, in his view, this is the task of the
imagination. Imagination bridges the gap between the forms of receptivity – space and time –
and the forms of spontaneity, the forms of thought. But, he says, it's an unfathomable
mystery. You see what he did, it's odd. I mean, it's very funny, it should make you laugh, it
should make you happy. What did he do? He broke the conformity of man and world. But
then he is forced to restore an inner conformity between man's receptivity and man's

                                                                                                    18

spontaneity, between receptivity and activity. And it's a miracle that this works, it's a miracle
that this works at all. An unfathomable mystery.

It's in this sense that I can say, if I try to sum all this up, that it's with Kant that we prepare for
what will later turn out to be an event of ever-increasing scope, that is, the rupture between
man and world. And what does this “rupture between man and world” entail? There were
already some elements of it in Kant’s thought. But at the time of Kant, would we even have
been able to recognize these? No, they had to develop, to germinate for themselves. What is
this rupture between man and world? That's where, last time, I started by saying too many
things at once. Obviously, this doesn't mean that man is outside nature. It doesn't mean that
man has a suprasensible destiny. It makes no difference whether we are part of nature or not.
Rather, it's the parts of nature that are indifferent to one another. Nature… we’re done with
the notion of non-indifferent nature. What does this mean? There's no complicity, there's no
longer any complicity. All knowledge – that's why I insisted on what preceded it – all
knowledge, the whole model of knowledge, was founded on a pseudo-complicity of man and
world, embodied in the… embodied, as the great poet Claudel says, in co-naissance.

That's why I passed through this long detour. It's as if we'd broken with, or as if, alas,
complicity was broken for us. No more complicity. We can no longer say, as Eisenstein could
still do… and why could Eisenstein still say this? For one howlingly obvious reason.
Because Eisenstein – who was, who cared deeply about thought – was a Hegelian, and with
Hegel we have the last great body of philosophy that will try to save the old model of
knowledge. So, Eisenstein still finds it possible to speak of a “non-indifferent nature”. But for
us, there is no longer any complicity, no longer any solidarity. What does this mean? The
rupture between man and world doesn't mean that man has an exceptional destiny in the
world. No. On the contrary, it means that man is still a part of nature, but the parts of nature
remain indifferent to one another.

As a result … But there is still science, yes. We're more and more astonished – and this has
been true since Einstein – we're more and more astonished that the world is knowable. And
what I mean is that scientists themselves can hardly believe it, that the world is knowable.
Why? Because the schema that guaranteed the world's knowability has collapsed, that is, the
schema of co-birth [co-naissance] or nature-mind complicity. There's so little nature-mind
complicity that, even if the world is knowable in fragments, even if there are islets of
knowledge... [Recording interrupted] [1:43:17]

Part 3

...which will then fully develop with Heidegger and his notion of "being-in-the-world". But
we have to look at this closely and see what it means. Is this Aristotelian co-birth? No, beingin-the-world is already… it already announces that the rupture has occurred. Far from
affirming the link between man and world, the link between man and world is no longer
affirmed – I'm just giving you the roughest outline but I’m doing so on purpose – or rather,
the link between man and world is only affirmed by and through anguish. In other words,
what remains of complicity is saved. But what is it that saves it? Anguish and tragedy.

This is exactly what [Alain] Robbe-Grillet will say when, in a fundamental chapter of For a
New Novel,8 in the text "Nature, humanism, tragedy", he again criticizes Sartre for having

                                                                                                 19

maintained a complicity between man and world in the form of the phenomenologist's beingin-the-world. But so threatened is this complicity, that he can only maintain it in the form of
tragedy. And the link between man and world will be experienced through Nausea. And
Robbe-Grillet can say, well, he can take the ultimate step and say that this is all over and
done with. There's no longer even a place to invoke the tragic in order to save the complicity
of man and world. Not even a place for that. There is no longer any complicity between man
and world, and no solidarity between man and nature.

So what does this mean? There is a loss of world. Man is afflicted by a loss of world, and this
is what Heidegger and Sartre were already saying, in their two very different ways, when
they spoke of anguish. Man suffers from a loss of world. What does this mean? What it
means is no longer hidden: the sensory-motor link has been broken. Of course, the sensorymotor link still works under artificial conditions. If you isolate a nerve circuit, if you isolate a
region of the brain, well, it can function, under experimental conditions. But, strictly
speaking, it no longer serves to establish a relationship between man and world. As we've
seen, the sensory-motor link is broken. In fact – and this is the paradox I tried to emphasize
last time – the more “man-made” the world becomes, the more man is in rupture with the
world. The more the world is humanized and artificialized, the more man is in rupture with a
world penetrated by man.

And indeed, it's easy to see why this is. Insofar as the world presents itself as if through a
display window… insofar as the world, or the supposed sensory-motor break that has taken
place, insofar as we find ourselves faced with what last year we called pure optical and sound
situations – to which we either do not react, or on the occasions when we do react, do so
without belief, affected by events that only half concern us… What did we see all through
last year? Pure optical and sound situations, events that, when they affect us… even death,
even illness, seem to only half concern us, seem to only half concern the person to whom
they occur. Empty spaces, disconnected spaces.

These are the three forms: pure optical situations, events that don’t affect us, empty or
disconnected spaces. This kind of world behind glass that proceeds by way of slogans,
advertisements and so on, mannequins and models, where its automatic character takes on all
the dimensions you can think of. Ultimately, the rupture is such that… what happens exactly?
We can no longer even believe in this world. What I tried to say last time was this: the
sensory-motor rupture, or if you prefer, the rupture of conformity, of nature-mind accord as
world, puts us in a situation where the problem of belief replaces that of knowledge. Namely:
how can we, or how will we be able to believe in this world as it is? The question of belief is
no longer: how can we believe in another world, or believe in the possibility of transforming
this world, but how can we believe in this world? What reason do I have to believe in this
world?

I won't come back to that, because I've already tried to develop it quite thoroughly, and there
I was referring to [Jean-Luc] Godard, when he was asking: what's going on if the world is
like a bad movie? If the world is like a bad movie, how can we believe in the world? What
are we asking, what are we asking for today? Not to believe in another world, nor even to
believe in the possibility of changing the world, but to believe in this world. We're asking for
reasons to believe in this world as it is.

                                                                                                  20

So we need an ethic or a faith, and here I was invoking Rossellini, because Rossellini's words
seem to me quite admirable when he reproposes something Tolstoy said. We so badly need to
abandon art. We always speak of those who have abandoned art, but we never speak in any
great depth about the conditions in which this happens – conditions that remain somehow
mysterious. Rimbaud’s decision, and those of others. And then there's another kind of break.
One of the greatest acts of abandonment was when Tolstoy decided that art wasn't worth a
damn, it wasn’t worth a single hour’s effort. And Rossellini seems to be quite Tolstoyan in
the way he says that cinema is finished, at least from an artistic point of view. What I'm
asking for is an ethic or a faith. An ethic or a faith, okay. Why is art no longer sufficient?
Rossellini puts it very well, and I think his answer fully applies to this point of my analysis:
art has completely endorsed the rupture between man and world. Art never ceases to sing of
the loss of world, and Rossellini says this very well. So now I’ll read a short passage of
Rossellini that I think is quite wonderful. I don't remember where it is… ah, okay.9

“What irritates me, what infuriates me in today’s world? Today’s world is too gratuitously
cruel [...] it is the practice of a voyeur, of a pervert. In other words: it’s cruel. I react very
strongly to all this because I firmly believe that cruelty is always an expression of infantility,
always. Today’s art gets more and more childish every day.” How true that sounds!
“Everyone seems to have a mad yearning to be as childish as possible. I don’t mean naive:
childish. From infantility we have fallen to the bottom of the human scale. We have become
anthropomorphic monkeys: we’ll soon move on to the stage of the frog or the eel.” That's a
good one! “This is what angers me. This total lack of decency. This infantility, we have seen
it in the nouveau roman.” He’s quite right, if we choose to define infantilism as this kind of
feeling of loss of world, of the rupture between man and world. “This infantility, we have
seen it in the nouveau roman. We see it in an absolutely unbelievable form in painting. We
have gone as far as total vanity, sickness. And all this in a world that’s daily becoming more
serious, more complex. Now, since this world has been made by people, I must always accept
it, in spite of all the moaning and groaning that goes on, such as: ‘We are heading toward
total destruction, the atomic bomb, etc.’ Today, art is either moaning and groaning or cruelty.
There is no other measure: either you complain, or you devote yourself to the gratuitous
practice of petty cruelty”.10

If you think of a painting like Bout d'organe, a painting like that... all this is true, it seems to
me. Well, he's... he explains that he doesn't make art anymore, and he’s going to make a
cinema that will be a cinema of ethics and faith, in other words, what he calls a purely
didactic cinema. But what is this? What does it concern? Because for him, the problem is not
to endorse the rupture between man and world. It is to find the means to give us reasons,
whatever they may be, to believe in this world.11

He may be a Catholic, but it’s a Catholicism that's strictly unimportant except perhaps to him.
You see how, at this point, whether Catholic or atheist, as I said before, there's absolutely no
difference. It's even striking that all these authors who, after Kant, went down the path of
substituting belief for knowledge, all these authors at the same time made a very odd
conversion to belief. I'd say, in my view – though we need to be cautious here – this was
already the case with Pascal. If Pascal was one of the first, before Kant, to have placed belief
at a deeper level than knowledge, and even to have replaced knowledge, including
mathematical knowledge, with belief, it was also because he subjected belief or faith to a
very odd conversion, namely that belief and faith would consist in believing in this world.
The point was for the world to be restored to us, to be given back a link between man and

                                                                                               21

world. And that's what it would mean to believe. To believe would be to rediscover a reason
or find reasons for believing in the world, in other words, a link between man and the
world.12

So, when Rossellini says no, when he labels infantile any position that derives its joy from
the rupture between man and the world – at which point it can only be moaning or cruelty –
it's not in the name of Catholicism that he demands belief. It was already in Kierkegaard.
With Kierkegaard, belief consisted of: Give me back the world, give me back the world, this
world. Just as Pascal's wager was: Give me back the world, this world. So, at the same time
as belief replaces knowledge, belief undergoes a conversion, a fundamental conversion that,
in my view, can be found in all the authors who take part in this substitution of belief for
knowledge, and who all converted in very different ways. They all convert belief, which
ceases to be a belief in another world and becomes a belief in this world, in other words, the
restoration of man's relation with the world. And what Rossellini wants to do is precisely…
and this is why he invokes ethics beyond art, it's not a question of plain old morality, he
thinks that art is incapable of renewing the connection between man and the world. One
needs ethics, one needs faith, he says.13

Well, in the same way, if I take Godard – I said this quickly last time but everyone knows,
and he's the first to admit how much he owes to Rossellini – I think he understood this about
Rossellini very well. What he understood admirably about Rossellini is this: the world makes
bad cinema, as he himself says. The world has become a bad movie, and man has broken with
the world. This is the rupture, the collapse of the sensory-motor schema. We are in the world
as though faced with pure optical and sonic situations. We're in the world as if we were
looking into a display window showing us a series of abominable things, or a series of
exciting things, whatever you prefer. We ask for reasons to believe in the world, that is, we
have no choice. The sensory-motor rupture means that we no longer have any reaction to this
world. So, the only way we will again be able to react is if we find reasons to believe in a link
between man and the world. At that point, well, at that point surely, if a link between man
and the world can be rediscovered, this link will constitute a new form of action. But if you
cannot find a belief in some kind of link between man and the world, if you don't fall into the
category, as Kierkegaard would say, of ethics or faith, a faith that is a faith in this world,
there's no way you will find this action.

So, when I say that Godard understood something of Rossellini, this is exactly the question
he poses to modern cinema. And generally speaking, when Godard poses a question, he will
be the one to answer it. He doesn't wait for someone else to give him the answer. It'll be up to
us, later this year, to see what direction he takes in formulating this answer. But if it's true
that the world makes all kinds of bad cinema, isn't it the responsibility of cinema and of
filmmakers to bring cinema’s critique into the world, and through this critique, to restore a
relation between man and the world, that is, to give us a reason to believe in the world? If we
no longer believe in the world, insofar as the world makes bad cinema, wouldn’t cinema itself
be capable of restoring our belief in the world? So, this would be the sole function of cinema,
not at all to give us the illusion of a world, but to give us reasons to believe in the world. And
in this sense, cinema would be the only art, or perhaps non-art, capable of giving us reasons
to believe in the world.

Hence the question: What does it mean to believe in the world? Well, we've begun to see that
believing in the world necessarily means believing in life in the world. And what does it

                                                                                                  22

mean to believe in life in the world? In this world, believing in life in the world means that,
despite the window displays, there's something alive, or between two window displays, or
somewhere, there's something that lives. So, what does it mean to believe in the world, or to
find reasons to believe in it again? Above all, it means believing in the body.

But what does it mean to believe in the body? What does it mean to believe in the body?
Obviously, the body is the link between man and the world. To believe in the body. So the
intentions of modern cinema would no longer be… it would break with the model of
knowledge, and with any image of knowledge and knowing. It would pass over to the side of
belief. It would be an art capable of giving us reasons to believe in the world – in other
words, to believe in life or to believe in the body. Okay. So is that the way it works?

In any case, we can clearly see both these aspects. The modern cinematographic image is, as I
said, an image fundamentally cut off from the world. We'll see later why, but for the moment,
I only wish to refer to the great ancestors of contemporary cinema, namely [Carl] Dreyer –
the image cut off from the world that typifies Dreyer's cinema – and [Robert] Bresson. But by
giving us an image cut off from the world, it claims to give us reasons to believe, to give us
reasons to believe in the links between man and the world.

If this were the case, cinema would be an astonishing practice. Once again, it would no
longer be a matter of questioning the role of cinema in relation to the imaginary, a problem –
I don't know why – that sickens me in advance, that seems to me to be of no interest
whatsoever… it's not that, it's not that. It's a question of belief, and this doesn't mean
believing in the story that's happening, because of course there is no longer any story. No.
You have to give the world reasons to believe. It's the world's fault. The world has started
making bad movies. Well, it's up to cinema to give us reasons to believe in the world again.
Which would imply, which would at least imply a cinema that has a political character.

So this brings me to my second point, I'm doing some... after all, we're still constructing our
program. I was saying, the second aspect, the second mutation of thought is: “Give me a
body, then”. And I said last time: well yes, it's no longer the body that disturbs thought. This
is no longer the case. In the old model of knowledge, it was the body that separated thought
from itself. Now, no! Give me a body. Give me a body, or give me back reason to believe in
the world, it's the same thing.

An admirable text by Artaud, “Situation of the Flesh”, says it all. Ah, it's such a beautiful
text. It's in the first volume of Artaud’s Complete Works, an early text by Artaud. You can
see the connection very clearly: Rediscover reasons to believe in the world… Give me back a
body. “There are intellectual cries, cries which stem from the marrow's delicacy. This is what
I personally call the Flesh. I do not separate my thought from my life […] One must have
been deprived of life, of the nervous irradiation of existence, of the conscious fulfilment of
our nerves, to realise to what extent the Sensation and Knowledge of all thought is secreted in
the nervous energy within our bones…” One needs a spell and so on… “I am a man who has
lost his life and who is seeking every way of re-integrating it in its proper place.”14

It's clear that in this text, it's the second part of the sentence that counts, although very often
we readers of Artaud make the great mistake of limiting ourselves to the first part, the part
that speaks of Artaud's demolition, Artaud's destruction, which would be equivalent to a

                                                                                                  23

rupture with the world, Artaud's loss of world. Yet, Artaud always conceived this loss of
world in relation to his efforts to restore his own beliefs. And by what means? He tried
everything. How to find reasons to believe in the world? That is, reasons to believe in a world
that necessarily go through the flesh, and therefore through the body? Hence the title of the
text: “Situation of the Flesh”. And his first response, or one of his first responses, will be
cinema. And we'll have to take a closer look at what he meant by this, because very strangely,
by using a language which is very close to that of the early pioneer filmmakers, he says
something that seems to me radically new, a bit like what Comtesse said earlier regarding
Élie Faure. Okay.

I would say that's what counts… every time you read Artaud, you have to think about this:
this is not a man who simply says “I am a man who has lost his life.” He adds: “and who is
seeking every way of re-integrating it in its proper place. For in some measure, I am the
Generator of my own vitality. […] For me, whoever says Flesh says apprehension above all,
hair standing on end, flesh exposed, with all the intellectual depth of this show of pure flesh
and all its sensory consequences...” and so on.

So, as I was saying, it has to go through the body. It’s inevitable. “Give me a body”. Does
this mean that everything is permitted? There are always misunderstandings on this point, and
I can't be the one to judge. I don't know if they are misunderstandings. Does this refer to a
culture of the body? Does it mean a body ceremony? I don't know, I don't know. Maybe it has
this sense, maybe not. No. Does it involve a glorification of the body? No. Does it involve
health? No. “Give me a body, then” doesn’t refer to any of that.

You must understand that this means something else. “Give me back a body, however fragile
it may be” – this is not a well-made body we're asking for. It's just a body. And maybe people
who have a very well-made body don't actually have a body at all. Maybe “Give me back a
body” means “Give me back a link with the world”. I know of athletes who are afflicted by a
loss of world. Think of those poor little gymnasts, the little gymnasts… I don’t know how to
say it, but it’s like they're really in a display window. That's right, an athlete's body is entirely
part of the display window world, meaning that their sensory-motor systems may appear to
be in good condition but it’s absolutely not the case. They're in full sensory-motor
breakdown. It's a catastrophe. They don't believe in anything anymore. They don't believe in
anything and, in any case, they no longer have any reason to believe. So that's not what is at
stake in having a body. What could it be to have a body?

Now, Spinoza, who was consumptive, had a body. Strange. [D.H.] Lawrence, who also had
consumption, had a body, even if it wasn’t in the best of shape. Nietzsche, who was half blind
and suffered from migraine, he had a body. What went through that body? A link with the
world, a relation with the world. A belief, okay. I would say that from Kierkegaard on… in
Kierkegaard, in Nietzsche and so on, you can find the same theme: a body, we need a body,
man no longer has body. So you have to connect the two questions – and that's why the
linkage seems to me absolutely... – to find reasons to believe in the world means to give
yourself back a body. And the two are absolutely connected.

So, at this point, I could make a new detour, like a kind of encounter with cinema, in terms of
this second aspect of “Give me a body, then”, and I'd say that this concerns the same
cinema… I’m thinking of Bresson, Dreyer, Godard and many others. Perhaps, perhaps…
These are just possible directions for our program – you don’t need to raise objections, I

                                                                                                  24

haven’t yet covered this. That’s what I always say. It all remains to be seen – films that would
aim to give us back a link with the world, to give us reasons to believe in this world. As I was
saying, this same cinema will also be a cinema of bodies.

What do I mean by a cinema of bodies? I mean a cinema in which sensory-motor reactions
are actually replaced. We're still in the regime of loss of world, in other words, you
understand that “Give me back a body” doesn't mean “Give me back sensory-motor
schemas”, it doesn't mean – I don't quite know how to put this – it doesn't mean “Give me
back the world of knowledge, the old world of knowledge”. Since it is belief that will restore
it to us, this will obviously be a completely different kind of world. And it will be a
completely different kind of body. It won't function through sensory-motor reactions, so how
will it function? Well, as I was saying, there's something very odd happening here, and this is
where a whole new type of cinema makes its appearance. In terms of the cinematographic
image, what is it that comes to replace sensory-motor linkages in a whole area of modern
cinema? Linkages of attitudes or postures.

It's a case of saying there's no longer any story. A story, if I try to formally define the notion
of story… I would say a story is the unfolding of sensory-motor patterns. You can see why:
stimulus, action, new stimulus, action. The unfolding of sensory-motor patterns constitutes a
story. When we're in pure optical situations, or pure sound situations, it’s as though we were
in front of a display window. There's no longer any story. So what do we have instead? It will
be a strange cinema. As I was saying, take a look at some modern films: there is, of course, a
pseudo-story, but where does their real interest lie? In a sequence of body postures, body
postures that link up with one another: bodies bumping and kissing, pressing against walls,
sliding down. As I was saying, the archetypal image of this cinema, well, the body leaning
against the wall, sliding, crouching, and then the two bodies bumping into each other and
kissing. What is this logic of postures? We're called upon to discover a whole logic of
postures that has replaced the logic of action.

As I mentioned, among the great modern filmmakers – I don't need to elaborate since we’ll
look at all this in more detail later – in my view, in terms of modern cinema, France was one
of the poles – I'm not saying it was the only one – but one of the fundamental poles of the
New Wave. It was Godard's and [Jacques] Rivette's cinema of the body, with its linkages of
postures… if you think back to a great scene in Prénom Carmen [1983]: the two lovers
jamming themselves in doors, throwing themselves up against windows, and so on and so
forth. You can't say it's a story. It's a linkage of postures, but at full speed, two meteors, two
meteors in a linkage of different postures.

Rivette… this also constitutes some of the great moments in Rivette’s cinema. And when I
said that it's not theater, and this is why it is cinema, it was because, in fact, these linkages of
postures are purely cinematographic and perpetually place themselves in relation to theater.
In Rivette's work, there's an explicit reference to the theater, but it is outside the theater that
the characters enter into their postures. It's in relation to the supposed play, in relation to a
supposed play, that Rivette's bodies enter into autonomous postures that don't duplicate the
play's theatrical attitudes but compete with them and constitute the real cinematic material.

In the post-Nouvelle Vague era, whether it be [Chantal] Akerman, as I was saying, or [Jean]
Eustache, whether it's – given that attitudes are vocal and sonorous as much as visual –
whether it be Akerman, Eustache, [Philippe] Garrel or [Jacques] Doillon, you have a

                                                                                                 25

continuation of this… I seem to be denying their originality but, on the contrary, I believe
very deeply in their originality in relation to the Nouvelle Vague, but this too is a cinema of
postures and attitudes. As I said, in America it was [John] Cassavetes – Cassavetes being
surely the greatest filmmaker to have created a cinema of the body, the development of which
we find in American experimental cinema, sometimes in ceremonial forms or ritual forms,
but keeping all the transitions between everyday attitudes and ceremonial attitudes.

What I mean is that you have a linkage between attitudes or postures, which is no longer a
sensory-motor linkage. And this is why I suggested borrowing from Brecht a word that I
think is very useful, gest (gestus), to designate the linkages between attitudes. Therefore, all
this cinema, this type of cinematographic image, will no longer be narrative. It will display a
gest, and it will be up to us to discover this gest, that is, the linkage of postures, the formal
linkages between one attitude and another. And what does this imply? And how does a gest
go beyond bodily attitudes? Is Brecht right in thinking that all gests must be social or
political?

Let me take a quick example that I think I missed before. If you go back to Prénom Carmen,
I'd say that the body attitudes of the lovers, for example, refer to a gest that is distributed in a
very, very complex way, but which forms part of the musical gest... in the sense that the
curve of the violinist's arm, for example, at one point provides the gest that corresponds to the
attitude of the two lovers when one, bending their arm, embraces the other, and therefore
there will be a whole system of resonances and echoes, visual echoes, sonic echoes and so on,
in which the linkages between bodily attitudes will constitute a gest that is at once political,
social, aesthetic and musical, and which will give this cinema a high level of complexity. It
will literally be a cinema of “Give me a body, then”.

I suggested last time, to help you prepare for your future analyses, that in the post-Nouvelle
Vague era, someone like Garrel seems to me to go very far in this direction, because Garrel
has done something that, in my view, had never been done before in cinema, namely, he has
exploited something that cinema had been criticized for lacking, namely the fact that it didn’t
give us the presence of bodies – as opposed to theater, where the body is present – and he
turned this around to make a superior cinema of it, namely, a cinema that would allow us to
see the process by which bodies take form. Now, this may sound a bit abstract, so how did he
manage, in practical terms? If you've seen any of Garrel's films, you'll be able to sense how
he achieved this precisely by giving what at first glance might appear to be inordinate
importance to the white image, the black image and all their varieties that would become
material through which bodies are constituted. And this will be an extraordinary cinema in
which gest and attitude will enter into perpetual resonance with the three fundamental bodies
– the three fundamental bodies being woman, man and child. And these will be the three
fundamental bodies of Garrel's cinema, which you find in... and here he seems to me to be
infinitely creative in this respect.

But if I try to provisionally sum all this up, I'd just say: look at the coherence between my
two points. My second point consists in saying: don't suppose that bodily attitudes, bodily
postures or attitudes are reactions. We're no longer in the world of sensory-motor schema. So,
what are they? They are literally elements of belief, the building blocks of belief. This is
where the two points are so closely linked. They are the building blocks of belief. This would
allow us to understand Pascal's “make yourself silent, dumb nature”, in another, and I believe
more precise, sense. Pascal says: Do you want to believe? What is belief? To believe is to

                                                                                                                 26

assume a posture. Assume a posture. Now, this is generally understood in the sense of getting
into the habit of kneeling down and saying your prayers and so on. But obviously he means
something else. Belief literally inscribes itself. Postures are the genetic constituent elements
of belief.

Okay, so we move quite naturally from the first point, the substitution of belief for
knowledge, to the second point, advocating for a cinema of attitudes, or rather advocating for
bodily attitudes in general, because this doesn't only apply to cinema, since it's through bodily
attitudes that we can re-establish a link with the world, or restore our belief in the world, in
this world, with all the dangers that this entails, once again, namely that the posture becomes
purely ceremonial, as occurs in a certain trend of experimental cinema, or that the posture
becomes solely quotidian, as in another trend of experimental cinema. What happens in this
case, precisely? I mean, in both cases, there will no longer be a gest. When a gest becomes
solely theatrical, or when a gest dissolves into everydayness, there's no longer any gest. Our
question would be, under what conditions – to use Brecht's beautiful notion – under what
conditions is there a gest that would be a real linkage between postures, a link of bodily
attitudes through which a belief in the world can be restored to us?

We haven't made any progress. I've simply put things back in order. I prefer that. So, we're
now on the third point since we had four to cover. And next time, I apologize in advance –
I'm warning those who’re not interested or who don't need to come, not to bother coming –
but we will have to do a little bit of mathematics. [End of the recording] [2:22:58]

Notes

   On the claimant, see L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze, "F comme Fidélité", What is Philosophy?, trans. Hugh
Tomlinson and Graham Burchell (New York: Columbia UP, 1994), p. 9, p. 71-72. See also Essays Critical and
Clinical, trans. Daniel W. Smith and Michael A. Greco (Minneapolis: Minnesota UP, 1997), pp. 136-137.
   Deleuze’s use of tromper/ se tromper to define the three images of thought cannot be fully reproduced in
English which normally translates se tromper as “to be wrong”.
  See Pascal, Pensées, fragment 397.
  On "non-indifferent nature", see The Time-Image, p.162, p.226, p.319 note 37.
  Traité de la co-naissance au monde et de soi-même, Paris: Mercure de France, 1913, p. 118.
  Here, Deleuze implicitly refers to Rimbaud's "Letter from a Seer" (Letter to Paul Demeny), Complete Works
and Selected Letters, trans. Wallace Fowlie (London and Chicago: Chicago UP, 1966), pp. 373-380. On this
subject, see session 16 of the Cinéma 3 seminar, April 17, 1984.
  Traité, op. cit. p. 83.
  Robbe-Grillet, For a New Novel, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Grove Press, 1965).
  On Rossellini, belief and art, see The Time-Image, p. 172. This Cahiers du Cinema interview with Rossellini
can be found in English in R. Rossellini, My Method: Writings and Interviews (New York: Marsilio, 1995), pp.
138-152.
   My Method, op. cit., pp. 145-146. Deleuze quotes this same text, with some notable variations and omissions,
in Negotiations, trans. Martin Joughin (New York: Columbia University Press, 1995), p. 129.
   My Method, op. cit., pp.147-148.
   On this cinema, which seeks to replace the model of knowledge with belief, see The Time-Image, pp. 171173.
   It should be noted that, while presenting an entirely moral position in choosing to make only didactic cinema,
Rossellini does not utter the word "ethics", nor this phrase. See My Method pp. 146-148. As for this phrase, see
The Time-Image, p. 173, where Deleuze says on his own account: “We need an ethic or a faith, which makes
fools laugh; it is not a need to believe in something else, but a need to believe in this world, of which fools are a
part.”

                                                                                              27

     See Antonin Artaud, Complete Works Vol. 1, London: Calder & Boyars, 1968, pp. 164-165.