1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Kant: Synthesis and Time

Lecture 02, 21 March 1978

Transcribed by WebDeleuze

Translated by Melissa McMahon

… Why wouldn't there also be a synthesized or electronic way of handling philosophy?1

Last time I tried to determine a certain number of very precise Kantian notions: a priori,
synthesis, etc... but very much as a function of what seemed the essential thing to me, namely a
radical reversal in the position of the problem of time in relation to philosophy. It's a critical
reversal, like a critical point.

I proposed last time that we take as three arbitrary formulae, but it's very dangerous, but never
mind there are three key formulae that aren't Kant's but under which, it seems to me, the three
great novelties or the three great reversals that Kant operates on the notion of time group
themselves.

So if we can manage to eliminate everything that is facile in this evocation of literary formulae in
relation to a conceptual study of philosophy, the first formula to which Kant would give a
powerful content is that of Hamlet: the time is out of joint. The second formula is anonymous,
and would be something like this: till now the task we have given ourselves was to represent
space, the moment has come to think time. Third famous formula, given by an author who had
nothing to do with Kant: "I is an other". I believe that if we separate these expressions from their
contexts, they suit Kant admirably, if you take them as abstract declarations. Maybe that will
allow me to understand in itself the formula "I is an other", as well as to understand in itself the
formula "the time is out of joint".

I have asked Gilles Châtelet to bring a contribution to the commentary of this first formula.2 So
I'm taking us back to the level of the first formula "the time is out of joint", how is it that Kant's
philosophy posits a time which is in the process of getting out of joint. The joint was this sort of
pivot around which time turned, in other words, in a certain tradition of antiquity, time is
fundamentally subordinated to something which happens in it, and this something can be
determined as being change, the subordination of time to change, time will thus measure the
changing of what changes, or else, which amounts to the same thing on another level, it will be
subordinated to movement, the subordination of time to movement, I say that that amounts to the
same thing on another level because movement qua local movement is the purest form of change,
which is to say the perfect form of change; that goes back to things in Aristotle and which cover
the whole of Greek philosophy. Or else, which again amounts to the same thing on another level,

                                                                                                         2

subordination of time to the course of the world, and it's in this sense that the classical definition
of the Greeks appears: time is the number of movement. What does that imply?

That implies a subordination of time to change, to movement, to the course of the world. That
implies that time is as if bent, it becomes circular. It is a time, independent or not of questions of
the eternal return which are posed in a completely different manner, time is cyclical. And indeed,
to the extent that it is the number of movement, it will measure the movement of the planets - see
all of Plato's prose writings on the eight movements of the eight planets - and the great circle that
will measure the time it takes for the eight planets to come back to the same respective position,
the eight circles of the world, you would have thus a great circle of circles whose point would be
assigned by the planet's return to the same respective position, you would have the world's year.
But this time become circular is but one with time subordinated to change, to movement, and to
the course of the world, and it's the great idea which runs through all of ancient philosophy: time
as the image of eternity. The circle of time, in so far as it measures planetary movement, and the
return of the same, it's precisely this time become circular. In the Timaeus there were some very
beautiful pages on the arc of the Demiurge which makes circles, this bending activity.

However, this time as an image of eternity, the cyclical figure of time subordinated to movement
and whose secret will be the periodic return of planets to the same position relative to each other,
is indeed a time which is the image of eternity. I would say that all of the time of antiquity is
marked by a modal character, and in effect the word appears all the time: time is a mode and not
a being. No more than number is a being, it's a mode in relation to what it quantifies, in the same
way time is a mode in relation to what it measures.

Obviously, it's not a matter of just taking Kant like that, it doesn't happen only in his head, there's
a very long scientific evolution which find its philosophical expression there, but it had already
found, no doubt with Newton, a scientific expression. Everything happens as if time "deployed
itself" [se déployait], but we must take "deployed itself" in its strict sense, which is to say
unrolled itself, which is to say lost its cyclical form. What does that mean that time becomes a
pure straight line? It's exactly as if you were holding a coiled spring and you let it go.

Time becomes a pure straight line. It reminds me of Borges, the true labyrinth is the straight line.
When time becomes a straight line, what does that mean and what change does that imply?

Still speaking musically, I would say that with Kant time acquires a tonal character, it ceases to
be modal. We can find no other images to indicate the violence of such an operation in relation
to the thought that, truly, the circle snaps, like a spring that uncoils itself, which becomes a pure
straight line. You can see that the cyclical line, when time is cyclical, is a line which limits
[borne] the world and just saying that time becomes a straight line means that it no longer limits
the world, it will traverse it. In the first case, cyclical time is a time which limits and which thus
carries out - which has always been the supreme act for the Greeks - carries out the act of
limitation. When time becomes a straight line, it no longer limits the world, it traverses it, it is no
longer a limit in the sense of limitation, it is limit in the sense: it's at the extremity [bout], it never
ceases to be at the extremity, it's the sense of a passage to the limit. The same word "limit"
radically changes in sense, it's no longer the operation which limits something, it's on the
contrary the term towards which something tends, and at the same time the tendency and that

                                                                                                        3

towards which it tends, that's time. How can we explain that? It's precisely a matter of assigning
the importance of this time having become straight line. It's not a simplification, it changes
everything in the very atmosphere of time and in the operation of time.

The simplest way is to refer ourselves to a poet who claims to be inspired by Kant. That's
Hölderlin. For the moment our problem is solely to say what is the importance of the change
when time ceases to be circular, ceases to be a circle in order to become a straight line. We must
keep in mind both that Hölderlin claims to be inspired by Kant and that he has many things to
say on what happens when time becomes a straight line.

Hölderlin poses the problem at the level of Greek tragedy, and in particular he opposes Greek
tragedy such as it appeared in Aeschylus and Greek tragedy such as it appeared in Sophocles,
and above all in Oedipus and in Antigone. You will see straight away that the schema that
Hölderlin develops, and that other commentators of Sophocles took up afterwards, concerns the
very heart of our problem. It amounts to telling us that there is a certain sense of the tragic for the
Greeks which is the tragic element of cyclical time. We find it very easily in Aeschylus. What is
the tragic cycle of time? The tragic cycle of time is, broadly, like three unequal arcs of a circle;
there is the moment of limitation; limitation is nothing other than justice, it's the lot assigned to
each. And then there is the transgression of the limitation, the act which transgresses.

The moment of the limit is the great Agamemnon, it's the beauty of royal limitation. Then there
is the transgression of the limit, which is to say the excessive act [l'acte de la démesure]: it's
Clytemnestra assassinating Agamemnon. Then there is the long atonement, and the tragic cycle
of time is the cycle of limitation, of transgression and of atonement. The atonement is Orestes
who will avenge Agamemnon. There will be the re-establishment of the equilibrium of the limit
which for a moment was overstepped. Notice that this tragic time is modeled on astronomical
time since in astronomical time you have the sphere of fixed points which is precisely the sphere
of perfect limitation, you have the planets and the movements of the planets which, in a certain
way, break through the limit, then you have the atonement, which is to say the re-establishment
of justice since the planets find themselves in the same position again.

And in this formula of the famous tragic destiny, as they say, it's settled from the beginning, and
when the tragedy begins it's already done: as Aeschylus' text itself says, at the moment when
Agamemnon goes into his palace and is about to be assassinated by Clytemnestra, it's already
done. But at the moment when Clytemnestra assassinates him, an act of excess and injustice, of
violation of the limit, the atonement is already there. It's this sort of cyclical destiny. Time is a
curve.

Whereas in some splendid pages, Hölderlin says: what is the novelty of Sophocles? In what
respect does Sophocles found in the end the modern sense of the tragic? He is the first to uncurve [décourber] time. It's the time of Oedipus. He says that before Sophocles, in the Greek
sense of the tragic, it's man who eludes the limit. You can see, in the limitation-limit, man
transgresses the limit and in so doing eludes the limit; but with Oedipus one can no longer say
that it has the atmosphere of someone who transgresses the limit, who eludes the limit. In the
case of Oedipus, it's the limit which is elusive. Where is it? It's the limit which becomes passage
to the limit. Splendid expression of Hölderlin's: in Oedipus, the beginning and the end no longer

                                                                                                       4

rhyme. And the rhyme is precisely the arc of the time bending in such a way that beginning and
end rhyme with each other. There was atonement for the injustice. In Oedipus time has become a
straight line which will be the line on which Oedipus wanders. The long wandering of Oedipus.
There will no longer be any atonement, even if only in the form of a brutal death. Oedipus is in
perpetual suspension, he will travel his straight line of time. In other words, he is traversed by a
straight line which drags him along. Towards what? Nothing. Heidegger will be able to say later
that it's towards death. Heidegger for his part will draw from the straight line the idea, which is
not wholly un-Kantian, the idea of a sort of being-towards-death.

We can see well indeed that in the case of Oedipus, in Sophocles' tragedy, the beginning and the
end do not rhyme, and moreover there is a zero-instant. Hölderlin adds that this un-curved time,
such that the beginning and the end no longer rhyme together, and it's precisely because there is
a caesura in this time, thus a pure present, that there will be - and it's this caesura that will
distribute it - a before and an after, and it's this before and this after which do not rhyme. For the
schema of cyclical time is substituted a time as straight line, marked by a caesura, a caesura
which distributes a non-symmetrical before and after. It's very important for us for time as a
straight line contains the possibility of distributing a non-symmetrical before and after, of
producing a non-symmetrical before and after using a caesura. We can call this caesura the pure
present. Hölderlin's analysis is admirable however because he tries to show that this form of
time, the caesura which distributes a before and an after, thus the linear form of this time marked
by a pure present according to which a past and a future are produced in time, well this time is
that of the modern consciousness in opposition to the consciousness of antiquity.

Since I borrowed the formula from Hamlet, what strikes me, independently of dates, is the extent
to which the whole schema that Hölderlin constructs for us to understand what he considers to be
the novelty of Oedipus, the extent to which that applies to Hamlet. For those who remember
Hamlet, it's curious the extent to which it's a linear time where something is always elusive, it is
no longer Hamlet who eludes the limit, it's the limit which eludes Hamlet, as if it was spinning
the straight line. And there is a caesura. For Oedipus, Hölderlin assigns the moment of the
caesura to the intervention of Tiresias, the intervention of the seer. It will constitute the pure
instant, the pure present from which a past and a future will be produced on the straight line,
which is to say a before and an after which no longer rhyme together. And in Hamlet, there is a
moment which seems extraordinary to me: Hamlet hesitates a great deal in his task of avenging
his father: the limit is literally elusive. When he hesitates a great deal to avenge his father it's the
same story as Oedipus. For a long time it's as if it's the time before, but we can't yet say "before"
since the before and after are only distributed by the caesura which is to say the moment of the
pure present; and then his step-father, who wants to get rid of him, sends him on a sea trip. Well
the sea trip is so fundamental that Hamlet returns from it saying: "there is something dangerous
in me", which he would never have said before, as if the sea trip had made him capable of
something which he was not capable of before. The sea trip has played the function of the
caesura and has distributed on the straight line of time a before and an after which are noncoincident, non-symmetrical.

We will see all that in this quite beautiful, obscure but beautiful text of Hölderlin's: "At the
extreme limit of the rift nothing in fact remains any more except the conditions of time or of
space [here Hölderlin is speaking like a Kantian]. At this limit man forgets himself because he is

                                                                                                        5

wholly inside the moment. God forgets because he is nothing but time. And there is infidelity on
both sides, etc."3 The categorical turning-away [détournement], what is it? It's that in so far as
time is cyclical, there is a sort of God-man relationship which is one with destiny in Greek
tragedy. When time becomes a straight line, there is also something which separates. In
Hölderlin's very beautiful commentary it's the double deviation in the same course of linear time
which will separate man and God, God turns away from man who turns away from God. Which
is why Oedipus is said by Sophocles to be "atheos", which does not mean atheist, but he who is
separated from God. So much so that God is no longer the master of time, the one who curves
time, and man is longer himself [inaudible] encircled in a sort of harmony with God, in this sort
of relationship with God, man is no longer anything but the caesura which prevents the before
and after from rhyming together, which distributes a before and an after which do not rhyme
together.

I would simply like you to begin to feel the importance of this time which becomes a straight
line. It doesn't mean simplification of the figure of time at all, on the contrary I would like you to
feel an intense complication of the figure of time. Time is no longer subordinated to something
which happens in it, on the contrary it's everything else which is subordinated to time. God
himself is no longer anything but empty time. Man is no longer anything but a caesura in time. In
The Critique of Pure Reason, there is a very famous passage, also very, very beautiful, which is
called "Anticipations of Perception". I would just like to show that, at a completely different
level, Kant tells us a story which is the same one that Hölderlin told afterwards. But it's not in
relation to Greek tragedy. Oddly enough it happens to be in relation to scientific physics. So
there are twelve extraordinary pages entitled "Anticipations of Perception". Kant tells us that
space and time are what are called extensive magnitudes. What does extensive magnitude mean?
It's not complicated, in Latin an extensive magnitude is one which accepts the formula "partes
extra partes", the exteriority of parts, which is to say an extensive magnitude is one whose parts
are apprehended successively so that, all quantity being at the same time multiplicity and unity -
when you say, for example, this is twenty metres long, it's the unity of a multiplicity - extensible
magnitude or extensive magnitude will be defined in the following way: the multiplicity refers to
a gathering of parts into a whole. That's an extensive quantity. But time is like that: a minute,
another minute, and then you say that's it, that an hour has passed. You can see the succession of
parts in their apprehension, the gathering into a whole: an hour.

Space and time are extensive quantities, no difficulty there. Kant adds: but there you have it, the
real in space and time - you recall that the real in space and time is what appears in space and
time, it's the phenomenon since with Kant the phenomenon is no longer an appearance, it's the
fact of appearing - the real in so far as it appears in space and time, no doubt it also has an
extensive quantity, there is the space of the table. There's no more to go over on this point; it's
precisely what Kant calls a synthesis. But the real in space and in time doesn't only have an
extensive quantity, it also has an intensive quantity. What is an intensive quantity? It's what fills
space and time to such or such a degree.

We can see straight away the difference between extensive quantity and intensive quantity since
the same extensive space can be filled to varying degrees. An example: the same space can be
filled by a more or less intense red, the same room can be filled with a more or less intense heat,
the same volume can be filled with a more or less dense matter. Kant will even distinguish the

                                                                                                      6

two questions fundamentally: can emptiness in space and time be conceived, and another
question, namely that space and time can be filled without there being any void in them, can be
filled varying degrees.

So what is the intensive quantity of the real in so far as it fills space and time? Moreover, there is
not just a real which fills space and time, there is a real of space and time, it's intensive quantity.
In opposition to what we have just said about extensive quantity, the two fundamental
characteristics of intensive quantity according to Kant - and this will be very important for all
subsequent theories of intensity - first characteristic: the apprehension of an intensive quantity is
instantaneous, which is to say that its unity no longer comes from the sum of its successive parts,
the unity of a given intensive quantity is apprehended in an instant. Which amounts to saying
that when I say "it's 30 degrees", the 30-degree heat is not the sum of three times ten degrees, it's
at the level of extensive quantities that thirty is 10+10+10, but thirty degrees is not three 10degree heats. In other words, the rules of addition and subtraction are not valid for intensive
quantities. The apprehension of the unity of an intensive quantity happens in an instant.

Second characteristic: the multiplicity contained in an intensive quantity is no longer referred to
a succession of parts exterior to each other, but refers to a variable proximity to degree zero. I
can say that each time there is something which fills space and time, I would say or rather Kant
would say that he has before him an empirical intuition. Intuition, you will recall, is the faculty
of receiving what is given, but the given is given in space and time, so intuition is not at all a
magical faculty, it's the faculty of receptivity. I receive something which is given, and in this
sense I have an empirical intuition. But to the extent that what is given has an intensive quantity,
which is to say a degree, I grasp it in a relation to its production starting from zero, or its
extinction... or the real which fills space and time from the point of view of its intensive quantity
is grasped as produced starting from degree zero or as extinguishing itself, i.e., rejoining degree
zero.

At that point the question is not at all one of knowing if there is an empty space and time, the
question is of knowing that in any case there is an empty consciousness of space and time. And
there is an empty consciousness of space and of time as consciousness determined by and as a
function of degree zero as the principle of production of all reality in space and time - production
starting from zero or the principle of extinction.

I don't want to make associations that are too forced, but at the physical level of intensity in
Kant, you can do what Hölderlin [inaudible], namely the straight line of time marked by a
caesura which is intuition = 0; what he will call the empty formal intuition, from which the real
which fills space and time will be produced, and it's this intuition = 0, this empty intuition which
constitutes the caesura. It's according to this caesura, this degree zero implied by all intensive
quantity, which is naturally correlated with time as empty form, as pure line. So on time as a
pure line, the caesura of degree zero is marked, which will mean that before and after will no
longer rhyme together. Again the question is not: is there an empty time and space? The question
is whether there is an empty consciousness of time, by virtue of the nature of time itself. In other
words God has become time, at the same time that man became caesura. It's hard, we understand
nothing, but it's beautiful. That's all I wanted to say on time that's out of joint.

                                                                                                         7

Intensive quantity effects a synthesis between the degree zero that it implies, from which it is
produced, and time as pure line or empty form. Intensive quantity as degree of the real which
fills a space and a time effects the synthesis between a degree zero from which this real is
produced or in which it extinguishes itself, and on the other hand time as empty form or pure
line. So much so that there will be a complementarity between the function of the caesura which
intensive consciousness plays in time and the empty linear form that time takes on. Hence, as
Hölderlin will say: man (the consciousness of time) is no more than a caesura, God is no more
than empty time. It's the double turning-away [détournement]. Kant didn't go as far as that, for a
simple reason that I will explain: in effect Kant subtracted God and the soul from knowledge. He
gave them a function in the field of knowledge, but God and the soul were not known as such
since we only know phenomena, we only know what appears. But he didn't suppress either God
or the soul since he was to give them a quite different function, a moral, practical function. But
from the point of view of knowledge, Gods passes into empty time just as the soul passes into the
caesura.

Is that any better? True lived experience [le vécu] is an absolutely abstract thing. The abstract is
lived experience. I would almost say that once you have reached lived experience, you reach the
most fully living core of the abstract. In other words, lived experience represents nothing. And
you can live nothing but the abstract and nobody has ever lived anything else but the abstract. I
don't live representation in my heart, I live a temporal line which is completely abstract. What is
more abstract than a rhythm?

For the Stoics, they are at once so new in relation to antiquity, and at the same time they have
nothing to do with it, they employ "limit" in a wholly different sense. The limit for them is no
longer the limit assumed by philosophers of the Platonic type, neither is it the other limit... Kant's
"Anticipations of Perception" means something very simple, which is that you can't say anything
about perception, a priori, if there is a colour that is called red and another that is called green,
that's to do with the given, you cannot say it independently of experience, it's given in
experience. There are two things that you can say a priori, which are: whatever there is that is
given in space and time, what is given in space and time is an extensive quantity, but also has a
degree, which is to say an intensive quantity. That is an a priori judgement. Which is to say
nothing would come and fill space and time as extensive quantities if what comes to fill them did
not also have a degree. So I anticipate perception since in this I have a determination, it's the
only a priori thing I can say. So there is anticipation. With Epicurus, it's not at all in this sense.
The Epicurean definition of time will not even be the novelty of a Stoic form of time, it's
typically modal time. Here I would very much like Gilles Châtelet to come in and say, from his
rather mathematical point of view, precisely how this conception of time as straight line is
fundamental.

Gilles Châtelet: [Inaudible remarks, comments summarized by WebDeleuze]: With Plato there is
a time which is created, which is to say there is a transcendence somewhere which is above time
and which has, in correlation with this, a higher dimension. This time of Plato's measures
periods, it's a set of periods and it assures the repetition of identities in the stars, the calendar.
The fundamental thing to retain is that time is a number. This time above the market measures
order. Time in Plato describes order, chaos has no time for example. Time is a sort of calendar

                                                                                                         8

that expresses the order of the world: it's a system of coordinates of order, it is in the world, it's a
worldly being.

In Aristotle, everything is set out through movement and time is in movement, it is interior to
mass. Time is attached to the body. Time will be purely astrological, but we owe to Aristotle the
notion of an eternal, infinite and uniform time. But with Plato and Aristotle we have a cyclical
representation.

In Plotinus there is an abstract operator which is called the One, which is without any
qualification, and something degrades once we leave the One. Certainly time measures
degradation in relation to eternity. Plotinus says that time is the irreparable addition of being to
itself. Time is a fall, i.e. a degradation, and Plotinus speaks of aspiring towards God. The
mathematical figure which would go with what Plotinus says is called a projective straight line,
time is a straight line, but a straight line which has been curved. It's not a circle either. It's a circle
minus one point (the One). Time in Plotinus would be a sort of projective time, there is already
the idea of irreversibility. In Plotinus time flows from the One and the One is transcendent to
time. Time is not exactly a cosmic being, it's the soul which appreciates time in so far... Time is
already an equivalent of eternity, it has neither beginning nor end and the point outside the circle
is not in time, the One is above, we never begin. It's rather paradoxical. In Kant time becomes a
condition of possibility of phenomena. The succession of phenomena implies time, so it is time
which is transcendent. Time is what is called a multiplicity, it's clearly said, it is uni-dimensional
and above all it is ordered. In the end he says that it tends towards a straight line. But what is a
straight line?... Time as a parameter gives the trajectory... The real straight line is a function,
time becomes the condition of a function; it's not the image of representation, it's the function
itself. There is the possibility of having a function of time. In what sense is Kant completely
modern? Because temporality is defining a topology... a straight one... But Kant's essential idea
is that his abstract space is pure parameter.

There are two things in Kant: firstly a technological revolution in the sense that it is clearly
affirmed that time is a real straight line, but there is also a notion of function.

Deleuze: You're saying something very important, namely that with Kant time ceases to be a
number or measure and becomes parameter. I would like you to explain the difference between a
number or measure and a parameter?

Châtelet: The parameter is not a result. A number, for the Greeks, is simply a measure, here the
measure of time is possible because... In mathematics parameter has no definition, it's simply a
notion. Time become parameter is no longer a result, it becomes an initial given. A parameter is
what is given, what varies.

Deleuze: I think that it amounts to exactly the same thing: to say that time ceases to be a number
or that time ceases to measure something and thus is subordinated to what it measures, and that
time becomes a parameter, time is related to a problem of constitution. When I said that time uncurves itself, becomes a straight line... There is something equivalent in this modern conception
of time where it is at the same time that an empty form of parametric time appears and a

                                                                                                       9

complementarity with something which makes a function, whether it is the caesura in the
tragedy, or else the cut in mathematical instrumentation.

I am just a bit bothered by the key role that Gilles Châtelet gives to Plotinus. In antiquity, it is
much more complicated than has been said till now. There were in fact two directions and the
two directions had at least something in common: in the two directions time only has a modal
character and never a [inaudible] character. However the two directions are time as number of
movement, thus subordinated to the physical cosmos, subordinated to physis, and then Plotinus
breaks away there, but he is not the first to break away, and he makes a conception of time which
is subordinated not to physis but to the soul. I wouldn't completely agree with Gilles Châtelet on
the importance of this point, of Plotinus, and on the one hand the two attempts: time
subordinated to the soul, time subordinated to physis maintain or at least have in common the
affirmation of a purely and uniquely modal character of time, thus time as the image of eternity,
a secondary and derived character of time, and the two have a point of convergence in the
Antique theory of the soul of the world. I would not make of Plotinus a...

Georges Comtesse: [Inaudible comment]

Deleuze: Transcendent in relation to Kant. Once again there are two notions. The Kantian notion
is transcendental, time is transcendental, but the whole Kantian notion of the transcendental is
created in order to refute the classical notion of the transcendent. The transcendental is above all
not transcendent.

I would like to move very quickly to the second point. I'm going very quickly. I would say that
the second formula that I would like to apply to Kant is... but thinking time is really the most
difficult thing - it's the phase of philosophy as critical philosophy, as modern philosophy defined
by Kant under the form of a critical philosophy. In classical philosophy, what is the other of
thought. The other of thought is above all space. It's space. Space is conceived as limitation. It
was conceived as an obstacle and a resistance, it is also limitation. Why? Because it happens that
my thought is referred to a thinking substance that is itself unextended, thought is the attribute of
a thinking substance that is itself unextended, but this thinking substance is finite in body. It is
finite in body: it's the famous problem which will poison classical philosophy, namely the union
of the soul as thinking substance and the body as extended substance. And the fact that the soul
is finite in body, even though the soul is in itself unextended (you can see that it's an inextricable
problem: how is it that something unextended can be finite in something extended? it will
produce all sorts of paradoxes), this in fact introduces a fundamental limitation of thought since
it will be the source of all the errors, of all the illusions which not only create an obstacle to
thought, but limit thought.

Third characteristic: if space is the other of thought, I'm saying that it's an other of, literally,
alterity. Extended substance is other than thinking substance even though it is uni-substantially
opposed, hence the well-known position of Descartes in which there were three substances:
thinking substance, extended substance and the union of thinking substance and extended
substance. With the Kantian transformation the aspect of everything changes. Why? We
remember time become straight line, and I can no longer say that what is important is space as
obstacle or resistance to thought, or as limitation of thought. Here it's time which ceases to be

                                                                                                       10

subordinated to space; it takes on an independence at the same time that it acquires this form that
we have seen, this pure form, and it's not time which takes the place of space, it is not an obstacle
to thought. It is the limit which works thought from the inside. For the notion of external
limitation is substituted the notion of internal limit. Time is the limit which works thought over,
which traverses thought through and through; it is the inherent limit, a limit interior to thought,
whereas in classical philosophy it's space which is determined as the exterior limitation of
thought.

So everything happens as if the "enemy" of thought was within. It does not receive it from
outside. There we have a sort of fundamental change. To think time means to substitute for the
classical schema of an exterior limitation of thought by the extended, the very, very strange idea
of an interior limit to thought which works it from the inside, which doesn't at all come from
outside, which doesn't at all come from the opacity of a substance. As if there was in thought
something impossible to think. As if thought was worked over from the inside by something that
it cannot think. From this point the problem, in Kant, will no longer be that of the union of the
soul and the body, which is to say the union of two substances one of which is extended and the
other unextended. The problem will no longer be the union of two distinct substances, it will be
the coexistence and the synthesis of two forms (they're completely different, two forms and two
substances) of one and the same subject. Instead of the union of two substances, the synthesis of
two forms of the same subject, which implies that the subject is not substance.

What are these two forms which will have to unite -- I can no longer even say in the same subject
since substance will not be inherent in the subject -- they are two forms for the same subject.
Now this subject will be traversed by this line of time; the subject is as if traversed by two forms
and is himself nothing other than the synthesis, namely the most mysterious point, the synthesis
of these two forms. What are these two forms? They're on the one hand the form of thought, and
on the other hand the form of the internal limit of thought. What does that mean in concrete
terms? The form of thought is in the first place the act of "I think", the "I think" as act or as
determination. To say "I think" is to determine something. What? We will see later.

The form of equal thought, in the most universal sense "I think" which is to say that it's thought
in so far as it is related to a subject; but I don't have the right to say that it's a substance. Second
determination of the form of thought: as Kant says, "I think" is the slightest [la plus pauvre] of
representations, it's the slightest of thoughts which accompanies all thoughts. Self = self, it's the
"I" of "I think". The "I think" is the universal form of determination, but in a sense, I determine
nothing and in "I think" the determination is at its emptiest.

Concretely acts of thought are concepts. We have seen that a priori acts of thought are particular
concepts called categories. So the form of thought is the "I think" and the categories taken
together, the "I think" together with what it is that "I think", namely the categories or the
predicates of any given object. These are what the forms of thought are. Kant will also use the
term “forms of spontaneity”, when "I think" is the act of determination and that implies an
activity which is the activity of thought. Kant will reserve the word “spontaneity” to qualify the
form of thought in these two cases. But what else is there besides these two forms of thought?
We have seen the form of receptivity or the form of intuition. In the form of intuition we also
have two things, just as a moment ago we saw that the form of thought is the self, the "I" of "I

                                                                                                          11

think" and it's also the concept as act of thought, the a priori concepts, which is to say the
categories, the forms of receptivity are space and time.

There are two forms twice. Last time, I said that space is the form of exteriority, time is the form
of interiority, this doesn't prevent these two forms from having in common the fact of being two
forms of intuition or two forms of receptivity. The form of receptivity is double: form of
exteriority = space, form of interiority = time, but the two together are the form of receptivity.
On the other hand there is the form of spontaneity which is the "I think" and the categories. You
can see, and this is very important, how it unfolds: you have a first great duality: form of
intuition and form of spontaneity, form of receptivity and form of spontaneity, and each one of
these two great forms has two aspects. The form of receptivity has two aspects: exteriority-space,
interiority-time, the form of spontaneity has two aspects: the self of the "I think", the I = I, and
the concepts that I think, the a priori concepts.

Kant's problem is how the same subject, or self, can have two forms which are irreducible to
each other (irreducibility of space and time on the one hand, and of the concept on the other
hand), how = the same subject can have two forms, principally the form of time and the form of
thought, and that according to the form of time, it is receptive, it is accepted, and according to the
form of thought it is spontaneous, it is determining, it effects determinations. It is no longer at all
a matter of knowing how the soul is united to the body, the answer to the union of the soul and
the body will evidently follow from the problem reworked in this way, namely the synthesis of
the two irreducible forms of the same subject, or for a subject. Which amounts to saying that for
the same subject there is the form of spontaneity of thinking and the form of receptivity of time.

It is by virtue of this that time is already the author of thought. And the Kantian synthesis is
obvious: the synthesis is something which separates or rends and this sort of Kantian self is rent
by these two forms which traverse it and which are completely irreducible to each other. So
where does the harmony come from, how can this limping subject function, he who can think
nothing without what he thinks having a correlate in space and time, who finds nothing in space
and time without it having a correlate in thought, and yet space and time and thought are two
absolutely heterogeneous forms. It's literally a subject who is fundamentally split, it is traversed
by a sort of line which is precisely the line of time. So much so that I would say, as a third point,
that in classical philosophy the other of thought was the other of alterity; with Kant something
absolutely new begins: the other within thought. It's an other of alienation. Of course Kant does
not use this word, but the post-Kantians will produce a fundamental theory of alienation which
will be revealed in its most perfect state in Hegel.

The difference between the other of alterity, which is really an exterior other which creates an
obstacle for thought, it is the other of alienation which is this interior limit.

What is this alienation? The alienation of the subject in Kant is precisely this fact that it is as if
torn by the duality of the two forms, each of which belongs to it as much as the other, form of
receptivity and form of spontaneity. Suddenly we are on the verge of understanding what
Rimbaud's formula "I is an other" could mean. "I is an other" is in the first place a formula of
Rimbaud's, it's in the letters. It's the most classical context possible, it is purely Aristotelian for
the two times Rimbaud comments on the expression "I is an other", he issues this formula with

                                                                                                     12

an extremely classical philosophy as its philosophical support. It is obvious that Rimbaud had a
teacher who gave him a course on Aristotle. It's letter II in the Pléiade edition, 1971: "I is an
other. Too bad for the wood which finds itself a violin." Letter to Paul Demeny: "For I is an
other. If the tiger awakens... I witness the hatching of my thought, I watch it, I study it."4

Aristotle tells us that there is matter and then there is form which informs [informe] matter.
Matter is the copper, the bugle is the copper which has been poured into this form. Nothing could
be more classical, and Rimbaud assimilates himself to a matter and says: thought forms me. In
the other example, the wood becomes violin, it is given the form of the violin and it receives its
capacities.

Rimbaud draws from this the formula "I is an other" which obviously exceeds the context. His
business is to find the poem, the appropriate poetic act. It's Kant who will do the philosophical
work which corresponds to the formula "I is an other".

We must at all costs, for Kant makes reference to this, without even saying it, we must start from
the cogito in Descartes. Obviously, I would like to spare you a lesson on Descartes, but
everything comes from this formula: "I think therefore I am", I am a thing that thinks. That is the
Cartesian development exactly, but it is summarized as "I think therefore I am". But the complete
formula is "I think therefore I am", it being understood that in order to think it is necessary to be,
what am I? I am a thing that thinks. You can see the progression: I think, I am, I am a thing
which thinks. I think = determination. “I am” is the position of something indeterminate; I am a
thing which thinks, the thing qua determined. Follow me, there are three terms: a determination,
I think; a thing to determine, namely an existence or a being; thirdly the determined, namely the
thinkable thing.

The determination determines something to be determined. You will tell me that if that's all there
is, that doesn't go very far. I have indeed three things then: I think, I am, I am a thing that thinks.
The "I think" determines the "I am" as a thing that thinks. At first glance that seems to be
impeccable. And now Kant comes along and says: not at all, he has forgotten a term, it's not at
all complicated enough. And Kant will correct, he says, OK, I think = determination - and here
we are fully in the future of German philosophy - in order to think it is necessary to be, OK, so
the determination implies something indeterminate which is to be determined by the
determination. I need this complicated formula for a very simple thing. You can see, I think
therefore I am, it's quite simple, “I think” is a determination, the determination implies
something indeterminate which is precisely to be determined by the determination. So, I think, I
am, that works. At that point he makes a cut, a caesura: he says: I think therefore I am, very well,
but you cannot conclude from this "I am a thing that thinks". Kant saw a flaw there in what the
other believed to be a sort of continuity that nobody could refuse him.

Why does it go from "I think" to "I am"? Once again, OK, the determination implies something
indeterminate to be determined by the determination. But, Kant says, that doesn't yet tell us the
form, under what form the indeterminate (which is to say the “I think”) is determinable by the
determination. [Possible interruption]

                                                                                                                13

... The determination, the indeterminate existence, the existence determined by the
determination, and Descartes thought he had a continuum of thought. The determination was the
"I think", the indeterminate existence was the "I am", the determination determined the
indeterminate: I am a thing which thinks. Kant says: I think = determination, I am =
indeterminate existence implied by the I think; in order for there to be a determination there must
indeed be something to be determined. But now, we still must be told under what form the
indeterminate, the to-be-determined, what must be determined, we still must be told under what
form the indeterminate existence is determinable by the determination. Descartes has only
forgotten one thing, namely to define the form of the determinable. So there were not three
terms, the determination, the indeterminate and the determined, there were four terms: the
determination, the indeterminate, the determinable form and the determined.

If you understand that, you have understood everything because you have Kant's reply. Under
what form is the indeterminate existence such as it is implied by the “I think”, under what form
is it determined?

The "I think" is a determination, which is to say a spontaneous act. It implies an "I think", but a
completely indeterminate "I think". Descartes told us: well yes, it's completely indeterminate, but
what difference does that make? Since the determination "I think" is enough to determine its
determinate, "I am a thing that thinks"... What he has forgotten is that "I think" is a determination
which implies something indeterminate, but also that does not tell us under what form the "I am"
is determinable by the determination "I think".

Kant's reply: the form under which the "I am" is determinable is obviously the form of time. It
will be the form of time; and you will come across this paradox that Kant will himself define in
an admirable formula: the paradox of inner sense, the paradox of interior sense, namely the
active determination "I think" determines my existence; the active determination "I think"
actively determines my existence, but it can only determine my existence under the form of the
determinable, which is to say under the form of a passive being in space and in time. So "I" is
indeed an act, but an act that “I” can only represent to myself in so far as I am a passive being.
“I” is an other. Thus “I” is transcendental.

In other words, the active determination of the "I think" can only determine my existence under
the form of existence of a passive being in space and in time. Which amounts to saying that it's
the same subject which has taken on two forms, the form of time and the form of thought, and
the form of thought can only determine the existence of the subject as the existence of a passive
being.

Notes

  This comment seems to be the end of a discussion Deleuze is having with students (possibly Richard Pinhas)
before the session begins.
  Gilles Châtelet was a colleague of Deleuze’s in mathematics starting in 1979.
  This quote and discussion derives from Friedrich Hölderlin, “Remarks on ‘Oedipus’” in Essays and Letters on
Theory, ed. and trans. Thomas Pfau (Albany: SUNY Press, 1988), pp. 101-108.

                                                                                                                  14

 Deleuze specifies the reference to Rimbaud’s text in the Pléiade edition, hence the so-called “Letter from the Seer”
(or voyant), to his former teacher, Paul Demeny. See the letter of May 15, 1871, Œuvres Complètes (Paris:
Gallimard, Pléiade, 1972), p. 252.