Gilles Deleuze
Seminar on Cinema and Thought, 1984-1985

Lecture 14, 5 March 1985 (Cinema Course 80)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Mpoyo Ilunga Stephanie (Part 1) and Nadia Ouis
(Part 2); additional revisions to the transcription and time stamp, Charles J. Stivale

English Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1

Lucien Gouty: We're starting the fourteenth session...

Deleuze: You said fourteen, no, that's way too many, way too many... So, we have fourteen
times that… fourteen times that...

Gouty: Forty-two...

Deleuze: Forty-two... that's something. Well, you'll tell me, it's nothing special... okay. So,
the last time... We made a plan last time. I'll say it again: we had a direct and arbitrary
comparison between the modern image and the classical image, arbitrary in that we took two
examples: one example being Eisenstein, the other Godard. The comparison led us to develop
three points. A tonal or “classical” cinema. How do we define this? Linkage of images by
rational cuts. And a serial or modern cinema… And how is this defined? Relinkage of
images by irrational cuts.

Second point: a classical or “structural” cinema or a cinema of truth… truth, I insist, being a
model independent of the duality: reality and fiction, because it’s the same model of truth that
serves both reality and fiction. What is this model of truth? Well, it implies that while images
are linked together by rational cuts, the linked images are internalized in a Whole, and the
Whole is externalized in the images. Such a movement, by which the images are internalized
in the Whole while the Whole is externalized in the images, is what is called “true
movement”, as opposed to a modern cinema which – as we saw last year, for those who were
there – rejects any model of truth to lay claim to the powers of the false insofar as these
powers of the false form a series. Everything links together perfectly. What we have is no
longer a cinema of truth, but the truth of cinema. We've seen the importance of this reversal,
and in what sense a cinema that could be called “direct” has nothing to do with direct cinema,
but on the contrary, has to do with this reversal, where cinema no longer lays claim to a
model of truth, it is no longer a cinema of truth, but claims to attain a truth of cinema.

Third aspect: the classical image, being tonal and structural, is an indirect representation of
time. The modern image, being serial and forming a truth of cinema, is a direct presentation
of time. What do we mean by direct presentation of time? We've looked at this in previous
years, and we saw it again last time. It means that time is wrested from its empirical form of
succession. And this happens in two ways. There are two principal direct time-images. It
takes the form of what may call “the empirical succession of time” or “the course of time”.
The direct presentation of time, or the direct time-image, takes two forms: the series of time,

which preserves a before and after, but turns them into intrinsic qualities of time. These
intrinsic qualities then present the series of time as a passage. But passage from what to
what? The passage of the present? No. The passage, as we've seen before, from one attitude
to another, a passage guided by a gestus, the gestus guided by an act of fabulation. The
flagrant act of fabulation is what distributes the before and after in the series of time.

The second aspect of the direct time-image… no longer the series of time but the whole of
time... no, I mean the order of time, which is to say the coexistence of relations of time, the
coexistence of all relations of time. And this time is no longer as it was just now for the
series, the horizontal series of time, meaning the sequence of attitudes following a gestus that
brings into play the act of fabulation, but is now the vertical construction of series in the form
we looked at… the coexistence of series. Now, that gives us a set.

My request last time, when we were wrapping things up, was this… do some of you want to
add some things… within this relatively narrow framework… other things that could fit in.
Or do some of you think that we should go back and review specific questions before we
move on? Well, this is a question only you can answer. In fact, the question is twofold. Either
there are things that need to be reviewed because they don't seem to be completely clear, or…
I don't know, or are there things to be added. No? Really? Good, very good.

So, we can move on… we have to, because, once again, in our analysis of the modern image
we were struggling with – each time we had to perform a sleight of hand – with what
constitutes the modern image, and we were unable to define it without referring to certain
speech acts. It goes without saying that if the act of fabulation is so important to modern
cinema, it’s because it brings into play a speech act. This was a way of saying that modern
cinema is inseparable from the talkies. It doesn’t mean that modern cinema coincides with the
talkies. It probably means that modern cinema requires a certain use of speech. Perhaps this
use of speech is quite revolutionary in relation to the appearance of the talkies in cinema. But
in the end, it was clear that whenever we tried to move forward, the question of the talkies
was a weight on our feet, a question we couldn't say anything about, because we hadn't yet
posed the problem.

And conversely, in terms of the classical image, for a long time we'd been dragging our feet
regarding a certain a problem we never talked about in other years, and now the time has
come. I delayed speaking about it for as long as possible because, well… the problem was:
even when it's silent, isn't there something fundamental about the cinematographic image that
puts it in relation with either language or something close to it… even when it's silent. So
now we find ourselves beginning a new chapter, and this new chapter will revolve around
three different problems. But you’ll see how these three different problems will never cease
to connect and to become entangled.

Each of us has very different impressions. What I find boring may interest you, what interests
me may seem extremely boring to you. So, a good year is when things balance out. When, if
it's fun for you, well, it's fun for me as well… and if it's fun for me, it's fun for you... But it's
never for the same reasons. All this is an introduction to say that in this new session there will
be things that amuse me a lot, or that interest me – and I think it's only this year that I'm
finally able to talk about them a bit… – and other things that bore me to death. As always, it
can’t be always fun. Moral duty compels me to speak about things that bore me to death. I
just have to do it. So, things are sufficiently perverse, the nature of things is sufficiently

perverse that some of you will indeed find very boring what I find amusing and vice versa.
I'm sure.

Let me say right away that there's a first problem we will have to consider, which coincides
with the beginnings of cinema. If there is a linkage of images, and if cinema presents itself as
a linkage of movement-images, in its most classical form – the linkage of movement-images
by rational cuts is the classical image – it has something to do with language. And after all,
that was how cinema began, that was the formula: cinema was the realization of what had
been sought everywhere from time immemorial: a universal language. It’s a notion so well
known that I won't insist on it.

You'll see how this is completely independent of the talkies. Or, again, from this first point of
view, if it's not language that informs the linkage of cinematographic images, perhaps it is
something neighboring language. And here I use the word “neighboring” in its most general
sense. What might be close to language in this sense? A whole school of semiology has
recently sprung up around this that tells us: initially we thought cinema had something to do
with language. But it has nothing to do with language, cinema is not a language. Instead, it
has to do with something neighboring language… and what would this be? A language
system. Hence Christian Metz's phrase: cinema is a language system without language. What
does this mean?

In France, this school was inaugurated by Metz's research, and then developed by numerous
disciples who lay claim to a linguistic semiology or, as they say, a semio-criticism, which
directly involves one particular filmmaker: [Alain] Robbe-Grillet, since Robbe-Grillet was by
far the first and foremost filmmaker… the privileged example chosen by a large number of
proponents of semio-criticism. Moreover, he himself became involved, very closely involved,
in their work, suggesting interpretations of which only he guards the secret.

Meanwhile, in Italy, a school of semio-criticism was developing around the same time, under
the aegis of [Emilio] Garroni, G-a-r-r-o-n-i… that's right, Garroni, that became quite
prominent and which includes – thought I'm not saying they all argue the same thing – which
also includes a famous Italian author, Umberto Eco, as well as a great filmmaker, [Pier Paolo]
Pasolini, who was involved in a no less intricate and complicated manner than was RobbeGrillet with the French school. So, this is the situation.

We don't yet know exactly what difference there is between a language and a language
system. In any case, what we do know, and what we can sa, according to Metz's formula –
which could be signed by all critical semioticians or semio-critics, for that's what they’re
known as – is that anyone who says that cinema is a language system without language is a
semio-critic or a linguistics-inspired semiologist. But we still don't know what this languagelanguage system distinction means. What we do know is that it should not be confused with
another distinction: language-speech [langue-parole]. A language system is not the same as
speech. So, linguistically speaking, we're obviously forced to distinguish between at least
three levels: language, language system and speech. While the distinction between language
and language system has become familiar to even the most casual linguist, the distinction
between language and speech is perhaps a little more difficult.

With this in mind, I'm announcing that I will have to expand on points that for some of you
will be self-evident. I'll have to develop them as if you knew nothing because, on one hand, I
assume that some of you do know nothing in this field, which is fair enough – there are some

among you who haven't yet been touched by linguistics in the slightest… I'd be surprised, but
you never know – and on the other hand, because I need to develop it for myself and see what
I can obtain from it. So, I make no secret of the fact that, for me, it's the dullest part I can
think of… but we have to get through it. We have to get through it, otherwise I won’t be able
to get to the part I really enjoy. Because work isn't always fun. What saves us is that it's often
funny… because funny, for me, is the second problem.

I had announced a first problem. But for me, what’s funny is the second problem, which is
something that really amuses me. Because the previous problem takes no account of the
existence, or at least – correct me if I’m wrong – takes no direct account of the existence of
the talkies, of the existence or non-existence of the talkies. I have a feeling that what I'm
saying isn't true for some semio-critics. But it’s true in principle. And in Christian Metz's case
in particular, it's very clear… he says explicitly that the audiovisual code – and we'll
understand later what this means – the audiovisual code of cinema must be regarded as a
completely separate thing from the linguistic code by which cinematographic images can be
considered a language system. So, the reasons why cinematographic images should be
considered a language system are completely unrelated to the existence or non-existence of
the talkies.

So, the second, very distinct problem… my second problem is not: What are the talkies?
because I'd like to put it more precisely, but: Are there speech acts that could be called
cinematographic? Does cinema present us with specific speech acts? Well, if I put the
problem in this way, I can immediately say that it already applies to silent films. Because I'd
like to remind you of what most of you already know… as is often said, silent films are
incorrectly referred to as “mute” [in French muet, meaning mute, is the word used to refer to
silent cinema]. Jean Mitry tells us that there has never been a “mute” cinema, there is only
cinema. There was silent cinema but that's not the same thing. In other words, people talk and
never stop talking, it’s just that we don’t hear them.

So, it's not a mute cinema, it's a profoundly “phonatory” cinema. Phonation is a speech act.
Whether the sounds are heard or not, is another matter. I'm not speaking here about the fact
that silent cinema, as we're often reminded, already had sound, either in the form of a
commentator, or in the form of music. But well beyond this, silent cinema shows us people
who don't stop talking. It is silent, not “mute”. Michel Chion, in his book on the voice, The
Voice in Cinema,1 I believe… yes, The Voice in Cinema, puts it even better: cinema has never
been “mute”, it has been deaf, which is the same as Mitry's formula, only more brilliant. It is
a deaf cinema, not a mute cinema.

So, there have always been speech acts in cinema. I'm wondering whether cinema presents us
with specific speech acts, or whether they are non-specific speech acts, meaning that there is
no assignable difference between them and speech acts that are simply recordings of ordinary
speech acts as they occur in social life, or that there is no specific difference with theatrical
speech acts. As you can see, the question makes sense: are there formally specific speech
acts, which is to say speech acts that pertain intrinsically to cinema and exist only in cinema –
and this would at least enable us to sort out all kind of nonsense that has been said about the
relation between cinema and theatre? Because if we can say that there are speech acts that are
specific to cinema, you understand that there's no longer need to think about the difference
between cinema and theater, because in terms of speech acts, they won't be the same.

I find this very interesting, and that's why it amuses me so much… but I'm also interested in it
from another point of view. This other point of view concerns a certain discipline, which
some of you already know, called sociolinguistics, that has always attached importance to the
classification of different types of speech acts. How to classify them? So, in the attempt that
has been made to classify images and signs throughout the years… well, I'm very happy if we
can draw from cinema something that is not only a specific form of speech act. Okay, that's
one aspect of the question. And the second aspect of the question is: if we can draw a
classification of cinematographic speech acts, then we have to ask ourselves whether cinema
has not revealed a way of classifying speech acts in general that can enrich sociolinguistics.
In other words, thanks to its specific speech acts, cinema exists in reaction to a general
typology... [Recording interrupted; 27:10]

... what is it by right? What I'm asking here is whether thinking that narration as an aspect, as
a given of the cinematographic image, is already similar to Euclidean geometry, meaning that
it intrinsically contains the universal and the necessary. You might say that Euclidean
geometry is not of this nature, since there exists not only Euclidean geometry, but also nonEuclidean geometry. For one thing, Kant wasn’t aware of this, it began after Kant. And I'm
troubled by this answer, because it would imply that the discovery of non-Euclidean
geometry, or at least its construction, would be sufficient to render Kant obsolete, whereas
this doesn't change anything. And for one simple reason: non-Euclidean geometry is in a very
complex way susceptible to, and even contains, what we may call Euclidean connections.
Can we say that the fact of Hollywood-style narration is of the same type?

I'll go back to Metz's three steps. There is a fact: from the very beginning Hollywood cinema
was a narrative cinema. Second point... here, I already have a question, which we'll leave
aside for the moment: is this really a fact? And in what sense is it a fact? Is it an empirical
fact, or is it a universal and necessary fact? Second point: if cinema is indeed in fact a
narrative cinema, then the cinematographic image is comparable to a statement. It is
comparable to a statement. This is what I call an approximation. This point is as important as
the previous one, and here too, it is so important that Metz is extremely cautious in its regard.
I will read from his book now, in case you think I'm distorting the text. Metz is extremely
cautious, he asks: What is the equivalent of the cinematographic image? And he says that the
concept of equivalent is an approximation. He asks: Can we compare a shot, if we take the
shot, in a very general sense, as the smallest unit of the moving image, the minima… well,
can we consider, can we compare the shot to a word? Which is a bizarre idea. Why would we
want to compare the shot to a word? Purely by virtue of the fact of the cinema he refers to
being a narrative cinema.

But does a shot resemble a word? He says no, it’s not like that… and in a famous text, which
is still quoted today, he says: A close-up of a revolver is not assimilable to the word
“revolver" but to the statement: “here is a revolver!” Even those rare images whose content
would correspond to a word are still phrases. This is a particularly enlightening case in point.
“A close-up of a revolver does not mean revolver... but at the very least, without speaking of
the connotations, it signifies: “here is a revolver”. In other terms, it’s not a word, it’s a
statement

Another quotation – but he's always very, very cautious in this regard – he says, well, it's the
least inaccurate comparison. “The filmic ‘shot’ […] resembles the statement” – and we'll see
why he's forced to say that… it's true, it resembles it – “The filmic ‘shot’ […] resembles the
statement rather than the word. Nevertheless, it would be wrong to say that it is equivalent to

the statement. For there are still great differences between the shot and the linguistic
statement”. I am therefore justified in speaking of approximation. Approximately, the
cinematographic image can be considered a statement. That's the second point.2

Third point: if the cinematographic image can be considered a statement, then under what
conditions, and how can we define the rules of use relating to this image? Metz's answer –
and those who have studied linguistics will understand this immediately, but I'll try to explain
it for the others – is that the conditions are as follows: that the cinematographic image be
subject to “operations” – which is to say subjective acts – “operations” that, in accordance
with linguistics, we'll call paradigmatic and syntagmatic… syntagm and paradigm, or better
still, syntagmatic and paradigmatic. And syntagmatic and paradigmatic are the conditions that
make it possible to compare the cinematographic image to a statement.

But why does he need these three levels? You see, he began from a fact, the fact of narrative
cinema. Secondly, an approximation: the cinematographic image can therefore approximately
be compared to a statement. And I ask, again, why approximately? Here too, like in
everything, there are some scary things… I'm not saying it's bad but it contains some
shocking things… it seems to run by itself. It's only that… if it can be compared to a
statement, it must be a bizarre one. He'll say this himself, that what we have is not a nonverbal statement, it's images. It's not words. So, he needs to forge the category. I'm not saying
it's well-founded or ill-founded. I'm just saying… he has to forge the category of analogical
statements or iconic statements, analogical statements or iconic statements. Basically,
statements that operate by resemblance, not by combining conventional units. The image of a
revolver is supposed to resemble a revolver, it's an analogical image, an iconic image, one
may say. Here, too, we run into problems, since the very notion of analogical statement or
iconic statement… isn't this some kind of monster? Isn't it really monstruous, this notion?
Since the image is itself analogical or iconic, according to him, it cannot be assimilated to a
statement in the form of an analogical or iconic statement. But is it a statement? His answer,
and this is the third step, hence his three-step approach, is: Yes, it is a statement, as long as it
can be proved that the iconic or analogical image is subject to the linguistic operations of
syntagm and paradigm, the syntagmatic and the paradigmatic.

This is going to turn into a knot… it's going to become a whole knot of problems. I mean, at
the level… – and here, I'm extracting the simplest meaning – it's going to be a tangled mess
of problems! I'll mention just one: How to avoid a vicious circle, which I'm not sure doesn't
already exist in Kant's work, which would therefore be a redoubling of Kantianism… what a
vicious circle. For I would say that the image is subject to the paradigm and the syntagm
because it is assimilable to a statement, but it is assimilable to a statement because it is
subject to the paradigm and the syntagm. How annoying! You understand how annoying this
is! It’s not possible! It's regarding this that the post-Kantians – and I like this because it's
where you can re-mix the whole thing – it's regarding this that the post-Kantians will protest
against Kant. They'll tell him that by relying on the method of fact and conditions of
possibility, you can't escape a vicious circle, namely, that experience is a fact. They will say:
Yes, experience is a fact because it is subject to conditions of possibility, but it is subject to
conditions of possibility because it is a fact. And they will say that Kant's error… the postKantians, like [Johann] Fichte, will say that Kant's error was in holding to a method of
conditioning without attaining a true genetic method. It would be necessary to generate and
not simply to condition, to produce a genesis and not merely a conditioning… So, I would
say that I have a difficulty with this at every level. I have my three basic levels.

Let me recap: the fact is narrative cinema. First problem: it’s no longer a question, it will no
longer be a question of movement, that will have disappeared. Movement won't be a relevant
feature of the cinematographic image. What will be relevant to the cinematographic image is
narration. So, if he finds language there, it's not so surprising, of course, he's already allowed
himself that from the start, or so it seems.

Second point: if it's true that the fact is narrative cinema, then the cinematographic image is
approximately… I can't find my adjective, three little dots, I've lost a word... approximately...
assimilable, there you go, thank you, approximately assimilable to a statement. Second
problem… okay, at this point, we need to establish the notion of analogical or iconic
statement.

Third level: if the cinematographic image is assimilable to a statement, then it is necessarily
subject to the operations of paradigm and synthesis [here Deleuze means to say “syntagm”],
which define its conditions of possibility, namely its rules of use.

Third problem, which is the deepest of all: how do we escape the vicious circle? How do we
escape the vicious circle whereby the image is assimilated to the statement because it is
subject to the paradigm and the syntagm, but conversely, it is subject to the paradigm and the
syntagm because it is assimilated to the statement? Well, we can only move forward if we
understand these two mysterious formulas: paradigm and syntagm.

Still... I'm a lot slower than... What time is it? It's funny, to have to assess… I used to say to
myself, I'll will be done with this in a quarter of an hour, and you can see why it's so awful,
can't you? I'd be there for a quarter of an hour, thinking that this is bothering me so much
that... and then, all of a sudden, you can no longer predict anything. Something, I wonder
what it was, made me laugh, something pleased me, amused me. It must have been Kant,
that's what Kant did to me. So... it's strange, you can't predict. So, do you want to take a
break? Think about these three mysteries, because at the same time they are self-evident…
these questions, they’re completely obvious, and yet it's mysterious, it's mysterious how he
can say that... [Recording interrupted; 44:25]

[Tape interrupted]

Deleuze: ... You have to feel it… don't we need a little light?

Students: [they answer that it doesn't work]

Deleuze: The light’s not working? That's no good. The switch near the door doesn't work… is
there another light switch? They must cut it off at a certain time.

From this first point, I'd like you to get a sense of how the notions of image and sign are on
the way out – I'm not claiming to show this yet, but I would just like you to feel it – are on
the way out, since we'll be no longer talking about image but about statement, bypassing
movement as a distinctive aspect. And we'll no longer be talking about signs but about
“signifying chains” in the sense of syntagms and paradigms… but all this is only beginning to
emerge. If the first point, then, concerned the position, the basic position of linguisticallyinspired semiology, our second point will concern the problem of the essence-use distinction
or, to put in another way, language-language system.

Hence the first question, and I have to say this – those who already know all this will forgive
me in advance… and then I'll refer you to the relevant texts, you can find this in any
dictionary of linguistics – what is a language? How is it defined? No doubt you can define it
in many ways, but one of the strictest ways in which language has been defined seems to me
the one that [André] Martinet… the linguist Martinet, Martinet the linguist, insisted on, and
he developed a theory which consists in saying that language, a language, is a doublearticulation system It's not phonatory articulation, of course, since it's not speech. It's a
system of double articulation, and he adds: language is the only system of this type. A
complicated case is telephone numbers, but then, presumably they wouldn't exist if it weren't
for language.

What do we mean by a double-articulation system? As you know, the first articulation is
defined by discrete, discontinuous, meaningful units. These discrete, discontinuous,
meaningful units, at least in Martinet's terminology, are called “monemes”. Very roughly
speaking, a “moneme” is a word. But in fact, it's not a word. Let's take an example, given by
Martinet himself: the soup is good. There are four words, but there are at least five monemes.
First moneme: the; second moneme: soup; third moneme: the verb to be; fourth moneme: the
mark of the indicative; fifth moneme: good. This doesn't mean that, for the sake of
convenience, we can't use an inexact equivalence… we're talking about approximations,
word-monemes. The moneme is a meaningful unit. As you can see, the monemes are
articulated among each other, and this is the first articulation.

This first articulation refers to a second articulation, that of “phonemes”. In the same
rudimentary fashion, we require right now, we can equate phonemes with letters. But we all
know that this is not the case. Why is a phoneme something other than a letter? Because,
unlike the moneme, which is a meaningful unit, the phoneme is a distinctive, non-meaningful
unit. It's a distinctive unit. For example, the letter b, the letter b is a phoneme. So, you’ll tell
me it’s a letter… No, because it's merely a phoneme, insofar as it's caught up in regulated
relations with other phonemes. If one says “billard” [billiard], the phoneme /b/ is, among
other things, in immediate relation with the phoneme /p/ which would give “pillard” [looter].
Here we have what we call a differential or distinctive relationship between /b/ and /p/, to the
point that if I say – as an example to reawaken your literary memories – to the point that if I
say: “les bandes du vieux billard” and someone replies: “What did you say? Did you say
“pillard”? … “les bandes du vieux pillard?” I would say, “No, I said les bandes du vieux
billard”.3

So, let me give you another literary example – I could give you a written test to identify the
authors of these examples! – another example… “As-tu dit cochon ou cosson?” [Did you say
pig or weevil] You see, here the phoneme /ch/ is indeed a letter, but taken in its distinctive
relation with another. At this level, you have distinctive, non-meaningful units, and you see
that it's through the articulation of phonemes, namely elements of the second articulation,
non-meaningful elements, distinctive non-meaningful elements, that the elements of the first
articulation, namely meaningful units, are made. The meaningful units are built upon the
distinctive non-meaningful units. Is this clear?

So, we have an articulation defined by monemes, and an articulation defined by phonemes.
Strictly speaking, there's no language that doesn't contain the phenomenon of double
articulation. What implies the phenomenon of double articulation, on the other hand, is a
language. What is the condition? The double articulation must also be fixed, which is to say it
should not be mobile, while the two levels must be neither replaceable nor interchangeable.

An additional question, for practical purposes: is music a language? Is painting a language?
For those interested in this question, you could read [Claude] Lévi-Strauss, The Raw and the
Cooked,4 in particular the opening section where Lévi-Strauss offers a very strange, a very
interesting answer saying that tonal music does indeed present a double articulation and, in
this sense, is a language, but not entirely so. Because the two levels are, in some respect,
replaceable and even interchangeable. But it would take us a very long time to go into this so
I simply mention the title for those who are interested in reading it. He says that classical
painting is also a quasi-language, but does not meet the last requirements of non-mobility,
non-replaceability or interchangeability… whereas abstract painting is not a language – a
very curious idea – that abstract painting is not a language at all, and atonal music is not a
language, and musique concrète is not a language. Well, the whole of Lévi-Strauss’ text is
very interesting, of course, for those who are interested in this.

So, let me add – for those who are interested and don't already know all this – that we can
now therefore classify all kinds of so-called information or communication systems
according to the criterion of double articulation. A linguist who has greatly inspired the
Italian school of semiology is called [Luis J.] Prieto, P-R-I-E-T-O, but I don't know where
he’s from exactly.

Student: He’s Argentinian.

Deleuze: Is he Argentinian? Okay. Prieto made a great classification of double-articulation
systems, from the point of view of articulation, which you'll find in one of his books,
Messages and Signals.5 Prieto's great classification from the point of view of articulations is
taken up again in an article by Umberto Eco, published in the review “Communications”,
number 15, 1970… where Eco takes up, with minor alterations, but only at the end… and this
produces a whole classification of systems of communication, or information systems. I'll
summarize it very quickly, either to deter you from reading it, or to make you want to look
for it and read it for yourself.

Firstly, codes without articulation… there are codes without articulation. You see, we're only
introducing the notion of code here, because I'll have more to say about that later. A brief
example: the blind man's white cane, or a bus route designated by single-digit numbers.
Yeah, it's obvious, a bus route designated by single-digit numbers is a code without
articulation. All right, it's a classification, it's...

Second case: codes that only have the second articulation, namely the articulation of the
type… that in language would correspond to the phoneme type, for example, the two-digit
bus line.

Third case: codes containing only the first articulation, which corresponds to the moneme, the
meaningful element. For example, the numbering of hotel rooms. That's clever, because it’s
still in the written domain: what does room 20 mean? Do you know what it means? The first
room on the second floor. Think about it, and you'll see that it's actually a code with only the
first articulation. Road signs, decimal numbers, okay.

Fourth case: double-articulation codes, which is to say non-mobile, non-interchangeable and
non-changeable, such as languages and six-digit telephone numbers. It's a good idea to find
out why. The best thing would be for you to find out why without referring to the article.

The last point, I don't know… the fifth case is the mobile articulation code, as in tonal music,
because you can assign conditions – pitches, for example – as a second articulation, which
are replaced by timbres. This is a case of transformation that is strictly forbidden in language,
where your second articulation can only ever consist of phonemes, playing cards, military
ranks, and so on. To summarize: language is defined by a system of double articulations
under conditions of non-mobility, non-interchangeability and non-replaceability. But the
question is getting too complicated. Is cinema a language? The immediate answer is no. No.
Cinema is not a language. [Recording interrupted; 1:03:36]

[Tape interrupted]

Part 2

... You will search in vain… you will search in vain for a second articulation. You can treat
the shots as elements of a first articulation… But what can serve as a second articulation?
Shots are meaningful units.

All right, let's assume that the shots are equivalent to monemes, and even then, it would be
problematic, but let's assume. What would the phonemes be? Obviously, there's one answer
we're in danger of jumping to: they are photograms, single frames. Photograms would be
phonemes. But this doesn't hold water for a second, since photograms are the constituent
elements, the constituent material elements in the form of frames per second, and cannot be
grasped for themselves. Except in the condition of a photogram-shot, or else you're once
again dismantling one of the conditions of language, since you've moved from the second to
the first articulation. So, in the unit, in the moneme, you distinguish between phonemes. But
in the image-shot, you don't distinguish between photograms, unless you make them pass
individually. In any case, this absolutely doesn't meet the conditions of a language, of the two
articulations that pertain to language.

Do you follow me? Now, no one has come up with the baroque idea of treating the
photogram as the equivalent of a phoneme. It would be a kind of vague metaphor. Someone,
however, someone really great, said that there are two articulations, or pretended to say so,
and that's something we'll have to come back to in his texts, which are really difficult but
incredibly beautiful, and this is Pasolini, just to annoy the semioticians. He says that signs
have two articulations, but he's obviously too clever to invoke the photogram. He says, the
equivalent of the phoneme would be the objects present in the shot, the objects framed in the
image. Umberto Eco laughs and says: Poor Pasolini! Why? Because Umberto Eco says that
the phonemes, namely the elements of the second articulation, are not meaningful and can
never form part of the signified. The objects included in the shot are indeed part of the
signified of the image. At first glance, Eco is right. Why and how, and by what right must
Pasolini reply to him, Poor Umberto Eco! We'll get into that next time. But, for the moment,
let's stop here, let's stop here and say that at first glance – and given the mystery of Pasolini's
text, which we'll leave aside for the moment – at first glance, it seems obvious that cinema is
not a language. Okay.

When we asked, “What is a language?”, however modern the answers – Martinet's answer,
for example – it was a pre-critical question, a Platonic question. Which is to say, of all the
apparent characteristics of a language, which is the essential one? Accepting this pre-critical
question “What is a language?”, we answered: cinema is not a language.

And Metz goes on to say that the error of the first people to reflect on the relation between
cinema and language is that they posed the problem in terms of language. Eisenstein is
merely using a metaphor when he says that cinema, insofar as it is constituted by montage, is
a language. It's a mere metaphor, because this doesn't consider the specific characteristic of a
language, the specific characteristic of a language being its double articulation. Do you
follow me? I suppose for the... and again, I can't do otherwise, anyone who knows this...

Okay. I'll move on to a completely different question. I'm no longer asking what makes up
the essence of a language, I'm reflecting on the rules of usage of a language. Which is to say,
what rules of usage are the units of language subject to? You see, I'm back to my notion of
rules of usage, and that's another kind of question. Whether they're phonemes or
morphemes… no, sorry, whether they're phonemes or monemes, they're subject to certain
rules of usage. I'm no longer looking for the essence here. I'm looking for the subjective rules.
But this is not a question of the subjectivity of someone speaking, it's not about speech, it's
about the subjectivity of language itself. So, what are the rules of usage for phonemes and
monemes? The answer is that there are two kinds of rules: some are called syntagmatic,
others paradigmatic.

Which acts do they correspond to? We'll call syntagm any conjunction of relative units – I
mean: phoneme, moneme or other, they don't have to be absolute units – we'll call syntagm
any conjunction of relative units present in a statement. And so, we’ll refer to the syntagm
corresponding to the statement. We'll say that there's a u v syntagm if u and v are present in
capital E, capital E designating a statement [énoncé]. Such an activity is a combination, an act
of combination... [Recording interrupted; 1:13:18]

... défaire [undo] … défaire would never form a syntagm small u and v… défaire would
never form a syntagm if we weren’t able to constitute a capital U and a capital V, constitutive
of a syntagmatic rule. Meaning décoller [take off], dévoiler [unveil], which are of the same
type as défaire. Do you follow me? I'm really trying to give you the most basic… Very good,
okay.

If you've been following me you see immediately that there is a problem. If I say the word
déterminer” [to determine], is it a syntagm of the type UV? Are there two monemes? I'm not
sure. I could only say that there are two monemes for déterminer if I could discover a rule
that involves and forms a capital U place and a capital V place so that dé- is to x as dé- is to
terminer [to finish] … well, once we acknowledge that in déterminer the syntagmatic relation
between U and V, that is to say between défaire… no, sorry, the syntagmatic relation in
déterminer, the relation dé- and terminer is not of the same type as the relation dé-faire.
Okay? Good, fine.

What matters to me is that the syntagm refers to a syntagmatic rule. That's why linguists
don’t generally speak of the syntagm but, more profoundly, they speak about the syntagmatic.
Metz goes even further: he speaks – for reasons I'll explain later – of the “great
syntagmatic”… the great syntagmatic, which doesn't arouse in me any objection at all, but it
does arouse great hilarity because I hear… when someone says to me the great syntagmatic, I
hear “The great lady…’ – I mean, “The great Queen is dead”… in short, it's Jacques Bénigne
Bossuet. The great syntagmatic makes me dream! The great syntagmatic... Is the great
syntagmatic dead? Well, we don't know… it's the syntagmatic! You see? Right, do you
follow me? And every time you construct a sentence, the rules of usage are syntagmatic rules.
You didn't know that, did you?

What if at the same time you are also constructing a paradigm? Well, the paradigm...
Remember, a syntagm is the conjunction of present relative units. The paradigm is the
disjunction of present units with absent units that are comparable, in one respect or another,
that are comparable in any respect whatsoever… for example, comparable from the point of
view of sense, or comparable from the point of view of sound. For example, “teachinstruct”… this is an example given by [Ferdinand de] Saussure, teach-instruct. When I say
the sentence “he taught me”, I could also have said “he instructed me”. So, what's the
difference? You've made a choice. Every unit that is present, that is, that you have chosen,
implies its disjunctive relation with other possible units that you have not chosen, that you
have eliminated. And that’s the way it is every time you speak, especially when you're
searching for a word.

Either the paradigm will concern units whose sound is similar, and not at all the meaning, or
whose meanings are similar, and not at all the sound. Let's go back to my previous examples,
my two examples: “Tu as dit cochon ou cosson?” and “Les bandes du vieux pillard ou les
bandes du vieux billard?” Okay. This time, it's no longer an act of combination, it's an act of
selection. It's no longer based on contiguity, it's based on similarity. The criterion is what
linguists call commutation. Commutation occurs if the substitution of two units u and u’
produces an assignable difference. When I say assignable, I mean, for example… there are
differences in intonation that do not produce assignable differences. Differences in intonation
are not part of this case. You see? Martinet analyses at length a paradigmatic example
between these two commutable statements: “Il dessine une carte” / “Il dessine une carpe”
[He draws a map / He draws a carp], this time based on the phonetic difference between /t/
and /p/. While “Les bandes du vieux pillard” and “les bandes de vieux billard” are based on
the phonetic difference /b/ and /p/. All clear? Good.

We'll say that the rules of usage of phonemes and monemes are syntagmatic rules and
paradigmatic rules, the former determining the legitimate concatenations or consecutions of
present units, the latter determining the legitimate choices between a present and an absent
unit. I remind you that during the first term, we already saw how [Roman] Jakobson drew on
these two aspects to identify the two poles of aphasia as a language disease: a language
disease with a predominant combination disorder – namely a syntagmatic disorder – and a
language disease based on a selection disorder – namely a paradigmatic disorder.6 And
according to Jakobson, there are two poles of aphasia that we could call – I don't think he
actually does, but it doesn't matter… – syntagmatic aphasia and paradigmatic aphasia. I won't
go back to this point.

A very intricate problem arises, and after this I'll leave you in peace: what is the relation
between the syntagmatic and the paradigmatic? There are two opposing theses: the most
frequent one, I'm not saying the most... well, the most frequent thesis privileges the
syntagmatic. The essential act, the essential rule of usage, is combinatorial, and the paradigm
is merely a means of forming classes of units with the same combinatorial possibilities, thus
subordinating the paradigmatic to the syntagmatic. A rarer thesis, that of Martinet, is quite
well formulated: the fundamental act of language is choice, at all levels, at the phonemic
level as well as at the monemic level. There are choices. And a syntagm cannot be constituted
if we fail to consider the other units that would have been possible. So, there's a kind of
primacy of the paradigmatic, which is a very, very interesting part of Martinet's thesis. A
median position, which doesn't exclude the greatest geniuses, sees the independence of the
two dimensions, and this is very well represented by Jakobson, with his two poles, his two
independent poles.

Okay. Where do I want to go with all this? You see what Metz's thesis will be? To end this
session, we could say what Metz's great thesis means: that cinema is a language system
without language. In other words, the cinematographic image is not a language, nor does it
form or belong to a language, because there is no phenomenon of double articulation. So, it
has none of the elements that define a language.

On the other hand, it has its rules of usage, which are mainly syntagmatic in nature, but also
paradigmatic. Only this time they don’t define linguistic elements but rules of language
usage. In other words, syntagmatic and paradigmatic relations are rules of usage that define
the language system. Double articulation is a state of elements that defines language. You
necessarily find syntagms and paradigms in language. But you don't find syntagms and
paradigms exclusively in language. The rules of language usage – syntagm and paradigm –
can be applied to elements other than the elements of language, and in such cases, we speak
of a language system without language. A language system without language is quite
something, it’s a cultural product that presents or that follows the rules of syntagmatic and
paradigmatic usage, although it does not itself present the elements of language.

So there will be language systems without language. If fashion or clothing is subject to
syntagms and paradigms, then it forms a language system without a language. If music is
subject to syntagms and paradigms, then it's a language system without a language, regardless
of whether there are phonemes or monemes. These are not at the same level at all. What
defines a language system are the two fundamental rules of usage.

Of course, in a language, these rules of usage relate to elements of language, but they may
also relate to elements other than those of language… remember that the elements of a
language are defined by a double articulation. But syntagms and paradigms do not require a
double articulation. Though they may apply the elements of double articulation, they do not
depend on it.

So, we can very well speak not of a cinematographic language, but you must speak of a
cinematographic language system. Providing that – and this is not going to be easy to
demonstrate – providing that the cinematographic statement – hence its linkage, everything is
proved – providing that narration whose elements are statements, analogical statements,
which are not therefore statements of a language, iconic statements, analogical statements…
well, if the analogical or iconic statements of cinema actually apply to syntagms and
paradigms, then cinema is a language system. So, the question of the relation cinemalanguage-language system has shifted from a Platonic to a Kantian status.

But under what conditions can cinema be considered a language system? Answer: if it's true
that the cinematographic image can be reduced to a non-linguistic statement – namely an
analogical statement – and if this analogical statement is subject to syntagmatic and
paradigmatic rules… You look devastated… In any case, we can't deny the rigor of his thesis
at this level. But what price do we pay for this rigor? Everything we've seen before,
everything we've seen before… That's where we are now, so we'll need another session. What
are the cinematographic syntagms and paradigms? In other words, what is the great
syntagmatic? [End of session; 1:32:16]

Notes

1
  See M. Chion, The Voice in Cinema, New York: Columbia UP, 1999 pp. 6-9.
  The quotation comes from Metz's Essais sur la signification du cinéma, which Deleuze already quoted in the
previous session, translated as Film Language: A Semiotics of the Cinema, Chicago: Chicago UP, 1990.
  Here Deleuze refers to Raymond Russel’s story “Parmi les noirs”, whose the first line, “Les lettres du blanc sur
les bandes du vieux billard”, is reiterated in the last line but slightly modified, “Les lettres du blanc sur les
bandes du vieux pillard”. Russel’s idea is to write a text that moves from the first to the last formula. Cfr. The
Logic of Sense, London: Continuum, 1990, p. 39.
  See Claude Levi-Strauss, The Raw and the Cooked, New York: Harper & Row, 1969, pp. 1-32.
  See Luis J. Prieto, Messages et Signaux, Paris: PUF, 1972.
  See session 6, December 11, 1984.