1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Leibniz and the Baroque – Principles and Freedom

Lecture 18, 19 May 1987: Principles and Freedom (13) - What Does It Mean to Have a
Body?

Initial Transcription by Web Deleuze; Augmented Transcription and Translation by
Charles J. Stivale (duration, 2:14:05)1

Part 1

Richard Pinhas: This is a question on zoology in relation to the previous session, and I am also
posing it in the context of Leibniz as well as Gilles’s problematic, which is first, which gets
articulated as: is there a possible passage, as concerns anxiety (inquiétude) that Gilles discussed -
- the anxiety of the rabbit that is being hunted, but also anxiety in perhaps a more general sense –
can this anxiety concern, must it concern other creatures, notably man? And on the other hand, if
that still remains anxiety in as strong a sense as we’ve understood it, is this anxiety linked to
what modern phenomenology calls worry (le souci)? How do you conceive of this articulation
between anxiety and worry, of a possible connection or a possible exclusion between anxiety and
worry? So, it’s a question on zoology.

Deleuze: Mmmm. [Pause] The second aspect of the question, it’s up to you to answer it.
[Laughter] [Pause] Good.

Everyone can hear well, because I’ve been told that often, in the back, you were hardly able to
hear me? This seems to me to be rather important. [Laughter] So, here we are. I would first like
to speak to you about practical things, and I’d like you to excuse me for speaking practically to
you in this way, and I am telling you rapidly that my health is rather so-so [moyenne], my health
is rather so-so, and I have to take a rest. So I’m going to… But it’s really ok; so-so is already not
so bad. So, I will rather quickly cease teaching courses. In any case, the fact I’m going to stop is
quite perfect. I’m going to do so in the following way because, besides, I just can’t manage any
more. I feel that the moment has come; I’m not managing it anymore. It’s very special, teaching
courses, you know, it’s very odd. There is a moment at which one feels quite clearly that the time
has come given how long we’ve done [this]… It’s not that this is the most divine activity in the
world, not at all, but it’s such a special activity. I’ve thought about this, but anyone, no matter.

So I am going to stop rather quickly, but I nonetheless am going to finish what I wanted to, that
is, today I’m going to, but you will see in what form, and I am going to teach two more courses,
two courses on what I had intended, that is: harmony and comparison of musical harmony in
Leibniz’s era, and about what Leibniz calls harmony. So today, we are going to have a session
about which I am going to explain to you what I’d like us to do, and the next two sessions will be
on harmony in which I will truly need the contributions of two participants here, competent in
music. But I need other people as well.

                                                                                                        2

Generally speaking – that I am accelerating a bit the end of classes is not serious because we
have done more or less what I hoped for, in the end, the essential part of what I had wanted to
say about Leibniz. I will still come to class in June, but uniquely to see students, either in the
premier cycle or deuxième cycle, or about theses, those who need to see me and that usually I
never have the time to see. So you will consider this from the viewpoint of our work in common,
you will consider that there are only two more classes, which makes the 27th [actually, the 26th]
and at the start of June. After that, I will no longer be speaking. [Pause] So there we are.

Having said this, today, I would like this to be a very calm (douce) meeting because I admit that
[Pause] it seems to me that it’s a domain in Leibniz’s thought [that’s] at once so complex and
mysterious and so ahead of his time, on other levels, I don’t know. So this is a domain that I
summarize in this form: what does it mean for Leibniz, having a body? What is that, having a
body?2 And I am going to try to do the most, I don’t know, not like I have done in other sessions
because, for me, in my reading of Leibniz on this, the questions abound frequently more than…
[Deleuze does not complete the sentence] And if I don’t succeed [in understanding], I would tell
you. Fine, here’s what I am not managing to understand. [Pause]

We started off from this, you recall – I am tossing out rather separate points – we started off from
this, that the individual substance, the monad, which is pure spirit (you recall, we saw it in this
form: it is pure spirit, it is soul or spirit), we have seen that the individual substance had two
requisites: it was active unity spontaneously produced from its own predicates. Notice that this is
already not easy: what might it mean, a predicate like “I am taking a walk,” whereas the subject
is the monad as pure soul? It’s taking a walk, the soul; what does that mean? Someone will say:
it’s that, on the other hand, there’s already a body -- no! If you follow my difficulty, it’s: No, we
know nothing at all about it. Why do we know nothing at all about it? We don’t know if there
aren’t grounds to be Berkeleyian, as we said the last time, specifically: there are perceptions, yes,
there are perceptions in the monad, and interiors in the monad, so at the outside, I could say: I
perceive myself taking a walk (me promènant). What is in the monad cannot be the walk. What
is in the monad is the percipit, it’s the perception of the walk.

I would like you to make an additional effort because we can sense that this is not going right. If
there were no body, there would be perception, that’s agreed, but would there be perceptions of
the walk? That seems strange. I take a text from [Pierre] Bayle, you know, in his “Objections to
Leibniz.” In his "Objections to Leibniz," Bayle says, in general, even not in general, he says
precisely: you remember the story of the dog, the blow of the stick he receives when he eats, etc.
And he says: But the monad of the dog thus perceives in a confused way the blow of the stick
that’s being readied – perception of the blow of the stick – and then, grasps the pain while the
blow of the stick is being readied in matter, and that the stick, as body, strikes down onto the
dog’s body. But as Bayle says: at the outside, nothing requires there to be bodies, and in my
opinion, the monad of the dog could very well link up the perception of the stick and the
perception of the blow. God would have constituted it in this way, but there would be no bodies.
That’s indeed what [George] Berkeley will tell us. [Pause]

What causes me to say: “there is a body?” These examples bother me. It’s true that from an
absolutely logical viewpoint, I can say: the monad of the dog passes on from the perception of
the stick; it does not pass from the stick to the blow, since it is purely spiritual, but it can pass

                                                                                                       3

from the perception of the stick to the perception of the blow; it passes from one perception to
another. These perceptions are data, in fact, inherent to the monad. So this, I can say it, but it’s
really strange: if there were no bodies, it would be rather strange for perceptions to be
perceptions of a pseudo-body. It seems to me that if there were no bodies, the monad would be
full of perceptions, but these perceptions would be of another nature than perceptions of ghostly
strikes from a stick. [Pause] Fine, I get all that.

And when Leibniz answers Bayle: why yes, why yes, this would, in the extreme, be possible; it
would be possible that no stick would exist and there would be no dog’s body, that would not
prevent the dog monad from having a perception of the stick and of having a perception of the
blow as a form of pain. We tell ourselves: in the end, ok, fine, but all that is just a manner of
speaking. What does that mean? Why must there be bodies? Having a body! At the point where
we are, in fact, we have well defined "monad", [so] why must there be bodies? I tell myself
something: perhaps the requirement of having a body belongs most fundamentally to the world
of the event. [Pause] One might almost say that the event has a double requirement, and if you
grant me that we have spent quite a long time questioning what an event is, while considering it
as a double secret of Leibniz’s philosophy, I would say: yes, there is no event that is not directed
to the spirit. Perhaps events are not eternal essences, but in a certain way, perhaps events spy on
us and wait for us. [Pause]

A student: Can I say something?

Deleuze: Yes.

The student: A small comment on the level of the event. Someone who seemed very qualified to
talk about this was Ferdinand Braudel. Very close to the end, he said: the event is a bit like an
explosion of dust, like fireworks, and after, everything settles back down into night and darkness.
It’s a phrase from Braudel. I mean with this that if the event is necessarily crucial, hence the
necessity of a body, a problem presents itself of the continuous and the discontinuous. Braudel
presented events – and he even had, anyway, when he was speaking of the event, he knew what
he was talking about – and so it was something discontinuous, that exploded like that and then
after, fell back into a kind of darkness or night, hence the problem of the continuous and the
discontinuous. In that time, what is the body doing? I mean, is it on vacation, is it out strolling
around? It is not necessarily substance, it is not always plugged in, as some would say today, into
the event in a kind of constant tension, since the event really appears like that only as a kind of
explosion that surprises us, and after, we get out of it what we can, but after, once more it’s
darkness, it’s night. [Pause]

Deleuze: I would like to say, with very great respect, and let this be really a suggestion: don’t
mix things up. You tell us: yes, Braudel says such and such. And certainly, what Braudel says is
beautiful, but I am not sure that it implies the discontinuity of the event that you state. But in the
end, we can talk about it. But we ourselves, we remained on the event for several weeks, for
example, not from Braudel’s works, but for example, on the event from Whitehead’s works, and
Whitehead told us: be careful, you recall, an event is not someone who gets run over; it is that
also, but ten minutes spent in this room is an event, even if absolutely nothing happens. It’s an

                                                                                                     4

event. The passage of Nature, as he says, in a location is an event, it’s an event. Two minutes in
the life of the Grand Pyramid is an event.

So, fine, when we’ve analyzed… and this is why I feel no need to go back into Whitehead since
we have done so. We have analyzed all the thickness of explication and definition that
Whitehead proposed to us about the event, from the convergent series that implied, the
prehensions, the prehensions of prehensions, etc…. If we began to study Braudel, I believe we
would have other definition, other values about the event. In my opinion, these would have some
very, very important points of contact. So, I am saying, in any case, one must not take on too
fully a historian speaking to us about the event in history since we are involved as well with the
event everywhere, an event here; someone lighting a cigarette, it’s an event. If there is a light [for
the cigarette], it’s an event, [Laughter] but there are really events that are entirely from all
directions [de tous courants].

So what I mean is, once I’ve agreed that we can ponder this, well fine, does this connect to
Braudel, and to what extent does that connect, for example, with what Braudel is saying? I
myself have a feeling that the event is double, that it’s a bifurcation, that any event is bifurcated.
Why? First, because any event precedes itself, just as it succeeds itself; that’s why I said: don’t
judge everything too quickly; about one continuity and one discontinuity, we know that an event
indeed risks preceding itself and following itself. [Interruption of the recording; text from Web
Deleuze] [18:32] But insofar as it precedes itself and follows itself, this is… Leibniz: the
perception of the stick precedes the blow, but the perception of the stick, the evil man sneaking
up behind the dog, this was already an event. [Return to the recording]

Part 2

Every event precedes itself, every event follows itself. [Pause] In a certain manner, one might
say: every event waits for me! And it’s already that. What interests me is a morality (une morale)
of the event, because I believe that there is no other morality than that of the nature of people in
relation to what occurs to them.3 Morality is never: what must one do? [Rather] it’s: how can you
stand what happens to you, whether this be good or bad?

One of the greatest moralists of the event is the poet Joë Bousquet. Bousquet suffered a ghastly
wound that paralyzed him, and among other things, everything that he tried to say and explain
was in some manner: this event, I was created to incarnate it. That is, starting from this, his
problem was, in a certain manner, being worthy of the event. You certainly sense that there are
people who are unworthy of the event as much in happiness as in misfortune. Being worthy of
the event, however tiny it might be, this is why this is a very concrete morality; this doesn’t mean
being serious (grave), certainly not, it’s not about that, but there are people who create our
suffering, [and] why? Because, in some ways, they render everything mediocre, both the good
that happens to them and the bad. You indeed sense that there is a certain way to live the event as
being worthy (en étant digne) of what happens to us in the good and the bad. I would say that it’s
this aspect through which every event is addressed to my soul. [Pause]

What makes those who whine (les gémissants) so difficult to be around? They are not worthy of
what happens to them. You will tell me: what happens to them… unless I am already saying too

                                                                                                        5

much by saying that whiners aren’t worthy of what happens to them, for there are whiners of
genius. -- I would almost like this to be this way all the time; I can’t suggest a sentence without
having to withdraw it -- There are whiners/wailers who are worthy of what happens, it’s even
these ones that are called prophets, the prophet in his fundamental wailing. There are some who
take wailing to a level of poetry, elegy, and elegy means the complaint … There are some that
complain with such nobility; think of Job. Job’s complaint is worthy of the event.4 Fine, I cannot
even speak. Each time I have to withdraw it, but you can correct [it] by yourself. I am simply
saying: every event addresses itself to the soul or the spirit. So, I understand a bit better; there are
events that address themselves particularly to the soul. At the extreme, I would say: ok, I
understand suddenly a little something, that we might be able to tell ourselves that taking a walk
is an event of the spirit, and that we might be able to count "I'm taking a walk" among the
predicates of the monad, yes. At least, this gets us a bit farther forward there.

If I try to create some terminology, I would say, at least this explains to me a few words that
Leibniz uses constantly: virtual, actual, the virtual, the actual. We've seen this. We've seen that
he uses [the terms] in rather different senses.5 [Pause] First sense: each monad, you and me, each
individual substance, is called "actual". It expresses the totality of the world, but this world, you
recall, does not exist outside the monads that express it. In other words, this world that exists
only in the monads that express it is in itself "virtual". The world is the infinite series of states of
events, [so] I can say: the event, as virtuality, refers back to individual substances that express it.
It's the virtual-actual rapport. What does this rapport imply? When we tried to define it, we
arrived at the idea of a kind of torsion: at once, all monads are for the world, but the world is in
each monad, which gave us a sort of torsion. And very often, Leibniz uses the terms virtual,
actual. I am simply saying: in whatever sense that this might be, he will tell us, for example, that
all innate ideas, all true ideas, are virtual ideas, that they are virtual; he will use “virtual” in other
cases, but in my opinion, always in rapport with the actual, and to designate the rapport of a type
of event with the soul. And nothing, nothing can remove from us the idea that this is not yet
adequate, and that, however profound the event might be, to the extent that it expresses itself in
the soul, something will always be missing if it also isn’t realized in the body, and that it has to
go all the way there. It has to be inscribed in a flesh (une chair), it has to be realized in a body, it
has to mark itself in a matter (une matière).

This time, would it be something else? If I looked for a couple, the event not only has to
actualize itself in a soul, it must also be realized in a matter, in a body. I would say: here, this is
no longer exactly virtual-actual, it’s real… No, rather it’s possible-real. It’s possible-real.
[Pause] The event would eternally remain a pure possible if it didn’t actualize itself in a body. It
would remain a pure virtual if it didn’t actualize itself, if it didn’t express itself in a soul. It
would remain a pure possible if it didn’t pass into a body. Why do I say that? Well, because for
Leibniz, the two couples do function: possible-real, virtual-actual. And this is quite dangerous, it
seems to me, since many commentators make no different between these two axes. [Pause]
There is a fundamental difference.

In the letters to the reverend Des Bosses about whom I’ve already spoken to you, in letters to the
reverend Des Bosses – yes, it’s Des [Bosses],6 appearing at the very end of Leibniz's life, a
whole series of very odd expressions appear. The letters are written in Latin. Appearing on about
every third page, so with a great frequency, the term "realisere" appears, or as a participle

                                                                                                     6

"realisans", [Pause] and [Leibniz] asks: what is capable of realizing phenomena, [Pause] or what
is the realizing thing (réalisant)?7 I quote [Pause]: "Monads will influence this realizing thing,
but it will change nothing in their laws."8 It matters little who the realizing thing is; what matters
is that it not be confused with the monads. [Pause] Another text: "I hardly see how one could
explain the things starting from monads and phenomena; one must add something that realizes
them" -- something that realizes the phenomena and monads, one must add something that
realizes them.

What do I find of interest here, understand? What is real? What's real is not matter, otherwise
it would be matter that would be the realizing thing; it is obviously not matter, it's not the body,
it's not the body either. Moreover, matter, the body, it's what will be realized by the realizing
thing. [Pause] As we will see or will try to see, the realizing thing has a close rapport not with
the body in general, but with the living body, with the living. [Pause] One not only must -- and
this seems to me a very profound idea in a philosophy of the event like Leibniz's, and all of his
morality is engaged in this as well. It so happens not only that the event is actualized in the
monad, it must be realized in the lived body (corps vécu), and in this sense, there must be a
realizing thing just as there must be an actualizing thing (un actualisant). The actualizing thing is
the monad itself. We need a realizing thing that realizes the event in matter, or that realizes the
event in the body, precisely as there is – not precisely as, but as there is [Pause] an actualizing
thing that… [Deleuze does not complete the sentence]

As a result, I come back, as someone asked me at the last meeting, I come back completely to a
departure point when I said, you see the Baroque is not really, [Pause] shouldn't be so difficult to
define. And as I was telling you, the Baroque is a house with two floors, and there must be two
floors. And one of the two floors connects to pleats (replis) of matter, while the upper floor
connects to folds in the soul.9 There are folds in the soul just as there are pleats of matter. No
doubt it's a kind of strange circuit from one stage to another that is going to constitute the
Baroque world. You sense now that we grasp a reason, at least at the level of Leibniz, we grasp a
Leibnizian reason concerning these two floors. The Leibnizian reason is the event. The event
implies these two floors. It must actualize itself in the monad, yes, but it must also inscribe itself
in a lived body. [Pause] When the event actualizes itself in the monad, it makes folds in the soul,
[Pause] but it must live it. It’s the soul there, it's your soul that folds itself. And when the event
inscribes itself in the lived body, it makes pleats, it makes pleats in matter, in living matter.

What's happening? I would like you to feel, yes, we are moving forward a little in the reasoning:
why does the monad need the body so much? Why isn't Leibniz Berkeleyan? Why can't we be
happy with the famous: Esse est percepi, that is: everything that is in the monad, in the end, will
be perceived by the monad, and that's it, full stop? I believe that the deepest reason is precisely
contained in the event, [Pause] that the event cannot be inscribed in the soul, without
simultaneously demanding a body [Pause] in which it is traced. [Pause]

And then, at this point, I stumble onto a text that I was no longer thinking about. I was thinking
about all that, and I remembered something. One works that way a lot, as if I had already read
that. And I told myself I had to… and I recalled a very odd book by Husserl, a book called
Cartesian Meditations. This book had as its departure point Husserl's coming to France, before
the war, and he presented a certain number of talks in German, but in France, that have been

                                                                                                        7

taken, that have been translated under the title Méditations cartésiennes, a title that pays homage
to France.10 Husserl invokes Descartes very strangely at the beginning, but the more he moves
forward, the more he invokes not Leibniz, but monads. It's such a strange term from Husserl's
pen, and one wonders what is happening. [Pause]

And it's especially the fifth meditation, so in the final [part], the fifth meditation in which
Husserl is going… But I am telling this to you a bit, quite imprecisely, so go look at it yourself.
For once, the text really isn't that difficult. For once, it's not terribly difficult Husserl. Husserl
tells us, without even referring to Leibniz, let's call monad the ego, to say the moi, with its
appurtenances.11 The notion of appurtenance, we see what he means. For example, "I perceive
the table," is an appurtenance of the ego, that's fine. I am used to perceiving the table; it's an
appurtenance of the ego. We see what he means. But this is already rather interesting since – I’m
speaking for those who know a minimum, but most among you know a minimum of
phenomenology -- the intentionalities, the consciousnesses of something are the appurtenances of
the ego. [Pause] And in a very odd text, Husserl goes so far that he says: these are immanent
transcendences. The intentionalities are transcendences, transcendences of consciousness toward
things, but these are immanent transcendences since these intentionalities are immanent to the
monad. The monad is the ego grasped with all its appurtenances. And all intentionalities are
appurtenances. You see!

And there you have Husserl asking a very strange question: how do we pass from immanent
transcendence to objective transcendence? [Pause] That is, is there a way for the monad, as it
were, to get out of itself? You recall the fate of the monad? We are fully within something of
such great importance for Leibniz: without doors or windows. There is no way for it to get out by
itself. At first glance, there's just no way. How could one get out of oneself if there are neither
doors nor windows? [Pause]

And here we have Husserl who relates a story and says: it's odd because the ego in its
appurtenance, that is, the monad, grasps among its appurtenances one very special appurtenance.
It's something that it identifies as the other, [Pause] that is, it identifies it as a lived body, the
lived body of the other. [Pause] That's a very odd intentionality, a special intentionality, why?
Because it's an empty intentionality. I've got a lot of empty intentionalities: for example, I look at
that whatsit, that apparatus, but I have empty intentionalities; it's the side that I don't see. Only
it's an empty intentionality, but were I to make a little effort, if that interested me, it would fulfill
itself. So that's fine. Whereas when, [Pause] in my appurtenances, I run into one of you, and it's
an empty intentionality; in what sense? In this sense, [that] whatever I do, I would not be in your
place and you will be yourself. I discover something in the appurtenances of my monad, a lived
body, which can only connect with another monad. You see?

And perhaps it’s that, if you recall Being and Nothingness, you remember a really beautiful page
by Sartre in which we do see that Sartre was inspired completely by Husserl and by this very text
by Husserl, while still making it seem, and not only making it seem, but in reproducing it. This is
when Sartre imagines himself or sees himself in a public garden, he’s looking at flowers, and
there he sees someone who is looking at them at the same time. And he explains, in a very
beautiful page, that it was as if it was his entire world that was leaking, and since he loves
miserablist metaphors, this was a world leaking through a sewer hole. You see? He was centered

                                                                                                       8

on his world, all that, and then he sees his neighbor looking at the same thing. It’s as if his whole
world was drained, was drained into the other’s direction. He is no longer the center of his world.

What do I find of interest in that? In both cases, the living body [Pause] is really like the kind of
line that creates passage from one domain to the other. [Pause] Could we say that the father of
all this is Leibniz? Alas, no! Alas, no! But I am not sure that it’s not he who is right. For you to
have in hand all the elements of the problem, what I believe is that, on the contrary, Leibniz
would tell us something like: very well, yes, in the monad’s appurtenances, there is still
something that is odd, it’s that never ever can one get out. And I believe… -- Here I must have
the texts as well as a lot of time; I’m just giving an indication. -- I believe one would find texts
not going all the way to saying -- I am not forcing him to say this – but [texts] circling around the
following idea: there would only be monads if there were no animals, if there were no living
beings. It’s vitalism that removes him from spiritualism. [Pause]

I return to Richard [Pinhas’s] question,12 this why I was telling you that, in my opinion, he
[Leibniz] is the inventor of animal psychology: he needs animals. And he explicitly says it often.
He says explicitly: those who believe that there are only monads and what is inherent to monads,
and what is included in monads, can only believe in human souls. It’s finally the animals (bêtes)
that force us to some extent to agree that there are bodies. [Pause] He would not say, as Husserl
did, he would not say that this is the existence of the other (l’existence d’autrui), for a simple
reason, as we will see. It’s that in closed monads, there is no encounter with the other (autrui).
We have to explain the encounter with the other (autrui). Already it can only occur outside
monads. He [Leibniz] cannot suggest it. Besides I am not even sure that, in Cartesian
Meditations, Husserl could suggest the encounter with… He doesn’t say the encounter with the
other (autrui), but the encounter with the lived body of the other (autrui). It seems to me that
this exceeds the power of perceptions contained in monads. So, he cannot suggest it, or at least, a
genesis would be necessary. As he says in the text, it’s very beautiful, for those that this might
interest, this text, as he speaks about a genesis, he indeed says: it’s a question of creating a
genesis, in this fifth meditation. I believe that he does not yet have enough data to create a
genesis of the lived body.

But see why I am lingering over this. I would like to have you sense something: it’s that the
entire morality of the event has these two coordinates: on one hand, be worthy of what happens
to you, and on the other hand, learn to inscribe it into your flesh. [Pause] One must not, one must
not… [Pause] It is even necessary sometimes, it’s necessary that everything acts. What are
civilizations? Each civilization offers us manners of inscribing into the flesh; each civilization
offers us manners of being worthy or not. So it’s very complicated.

Take a case that fascinates me: the jester. The jester is a fundamental personage. There have been
lots of studies of the jester; very interesting, the jester. At first glance, take the Russian jester, or
else the English jester. I mean that you can look from Shakespeare to Dostoyevsky, and I have
forgotten some. At first glance, the jester is someone who, when something happens to him, is
unworthy, and deliberately is unworthy [of the event], and then avoids inscribing it into his flesh;
it flees in all directions. And then, in a more complex manner, we always learn that it was the
jester who was the only one to inscribe in his flesh and to be worthy of what happened. There are
all sorts of stories about this.

                                                                                                     9

But finally, I am saying, we could… [Deleuze goes to the board] We do it like this.13 See, we
could draw a line that would begin by being straight, horizontal, and then we would have it
bifurcate into two, like this, like a little branch, you see? We would put “event” on the straight
line. Then, on the upper bifurcation, we would put “virtual”. Fine, I’d be happy to do it, but is
this clear? We’d put “virtual”. On the lower bifurcation, what would we put? We would put
"possible", and then we would place there a huge bubble with "actual” written on it; this would
be the monad.14 The monad includes the virtual world, it actualizes it; it is actual. So, on the
other hand, we would put "possible", and we would not place a bubble there, and we will see
what we would have to put… We would place some gadget, [Laughter] and this time, it would
be: "real,” with a mistake we must not make: the one that would seem to say that it’s matter
that’s real. No, it’s not matter that’s real, but matter acquires the reality that it can, or that
corresponds to it, when a realizing thing, about which we know ahead of time that it concerns the
lived body, [Pause] incarnates within matter. Matter takes some reality when it incarnates the
event. So, I cannot say it better. Good, this is fine. [Pause] You see?

I have the feeling that, in Leibniz, these aspects are why there are two floors; this is why there
are two floors. The two floors is the circuit of the event, and yet you sense in advance that there
will never be the least direct rapport between soul and body. The two floors will always remain
separate. I say simply: the realizing thing will perhaps be that which causes passage from one to
the other, that which makes the aspect of the event pass from one to the other. The realizing
thing, once again, is a notion that only appears entirely at the end of Leibniz’s works, in his final
years. Before, he is satisfied with invoking, how to say this, a correspondence between the two
floors, the upper floor and the lower floor. Entirely at the very end, he arrives at something very
profound: it is not enough for the event to actualize itself in the monads; it must realize itself in
the body. That [insight] was not yet in his earlier philosophy. There is a correspondence between
the two, and what realizes in the body is a realizing thing that will explain the rapport of the
monad and the lived body. [Pause]*

So, as a result, at the very end entirely, we would have three aspects from Leibniz: the soul and
the folds in the soul; the folds in the soul are the events that are expressed in the soul, the soul
and the folds in the soul. Matter and the pleats in matter, [Pause] this in which the event realizes
itself. And between the two, assuring the realization, [is] the realizing thing that can no longer be
either monad, or lived body, but that can only be one thing: that which brings the lived body to
the monad. It will be the rapport of the folds in the soul with the pleats of matter, and that
corresponds to the Latin name: le vinculum subtantialae. The vinculum, what is it? It’s the chain,
it’s the knot, it’s the chain. What is this chain? Is a chain necessary there so that the two kinds of
folds correspond to each other? Why [offer] this chain at the last moment? Is it this that will
decide on textures of matter, but also qualities of the soul? We are going to be thrown into an
entire philosophy that will therefore confirm for us that not only are there folds in the soul, pleats
of matter, but [that] a vinculum has to be made to intervene, one that, if it were possible, would
sew them to each other. It doesn’t sew them to each other, in fact, but it sews a lived body in a
special way, a living body that is the body of the monad. All this we have to look at more
closely.15

                                                                                                 10

But I am saying, this is not for you to understand because if I addressed myself to your
understanding, I believe that this would be very obscure; it’s so that you feel something. Here I
believe that Leibniz makes us feel something and that I really had to try as well to make you feel:
it’s a conception of the event. It’s as if I told you, well fine, what do you want an event to be
other than something that makes us stand up straight, or else that makes us lie down, something
that calls out to a [kind of] dignity, and that has nothing to do with “let us be worthy because of
others, someone watching me.” And also it’s something that creates a wound (fait une plaie) –
but a wound, I am wrong in saying wound, that’s even grotesque -- or [something] that scratches.
There are caresses (chatouillements) of events, and that’s perhaps the best ones. There’s all that:
that it concerns your body in that form! And that it concerns your soul in that form!

And this is very difficult. I mean, everything always has its little brother as an abominable
misunderstanding (contresens). “Be worthy of the event”, well, that can be an odious sentence.
It’s precisely because we have to agree on the word “worthy” (digne). I imagine that someone
might have just suffered an important loss, not a loss of money, but a very important human loss.
You tap him on the back and tell him: “Be worthy of the event.” I hope that he would haul back
and smack me a few times. What does dignity mean? Here, I cannot say more about it; it’s for
each of you to [answer] if you pose the problem like that. One also has to scratch at one’s body.
Scratch at oneself, what does that means? One has to be a louse (un pouilleux) of the event.
[Laughter] And how does one scratch at oneself? There are hideous manners of scratching at
oneself: “Oh, I’m the most unfortunate.” And every morning, I offer myself some scratching, “to
me, the most unfortunate!” And then, in fact, there are hideous ways of scratching oneself. This
is something else entirely. I am not the most unfortunate. But, finally, there’s no sure formula
(pas de recette) for this. So, I am telling you, fine, this is one point.

There’s nothing [else]? … Any reactions, any…? It’s not that I am demanding any at all. No
reactions? You sense where I am going with this, it’s all fine! Having a lived body, having a
living body, fine. Being a monad, having a living body: there you see that being a monad is no
more than half of ourselves: we must have a living body! [Pause] Yes? [Interruption of the
recording, text from WebDeleuze] [1:05:01]

Georges Comtesse: I remember in a text by Leibniz that he was talking about what you were
suggesting, the vinculum. He takes the example of hearing (l’audition), starting from a sound
source, hearing an echo. [Return to the BNF recording]

Part 3

Deleuze: Because he is… This is very odd because, in my opinion, there are two texts. The
vinculum is a term coming very late in Leibniz’s work. So, you only find it in texts entirely at the
end, and notably, in my view, I am not even sure that it exists elsewhere than in the
correspondence with Des Bosses. That’s one point. But, a second point, there are in the Letters to
Arnauld, much earlier; there is, in the Letters to Arnauld, an extraordinary text in which he
imagines the conditions of an orchestra in which all the different parts would not be visible and
where – he doesn’t use the word vinculum since he doesn’t know it, or finally, he is not using it
for his own purposes – he already uses the word echo. In this, your recall is perfectly correct. But
there, to my knowledge, we owe it in great measure -- because the text is in the correspondence

                                                                                                  11

to Des Bosses when he says that the vinculum is an echo, it’s from texts of very, very great
difficulty -- and to my knowledge, it’s [Yvon] Belaval who was able to provide commentary in
such a way that we experience no difficulty, and you very aptly retained it; what you are saying
is very faithful to Leibniz, but it corresponds to the interpretation by [Belaval].16

It’s even obvious what you are saying. Let’s suppose -- I am simplifying enormously -- there are
four sound sources. Assimilate them into monads. Fine. There are four. Assign four notes; the
notes are perceptions that you can assimilate to the monads. What is an echo? That’s what is
wonderful in an echo, that it is second; it assumes there are sound sources. Only what is the
miracle of an echo? As Comtesse said, he [Leibniz] implies, let us assume, for example, a wall.
What effect does the wall have? It is going to constitute the unity of the four sources by echo;
they had no unity. You will tell me: they might have unity if it was four notes taken out of a
particular piece of music; it was four notes. The miracle of the echo, as Leibniz tells us, is to
introduce a secondary unity. But this secondary unity is going to be essential since it’s through it
that he is going to explain the vinculum, that he’s going to explain this kind of stitching (couture)
of the living body. The stitching of the living body will be an echo. And you see why he will
need that: what creates the unity of the lived body, of the living body? There suddenly, he forces
me to go faster, but the faster one goes, the better it will be. [Pause]

What can create the unity of the living body? Monads are spirits, they are without doors or
windows, they are one by one. There are no monads of monads, you see? [Pause] There indeed
has to be something equivalent to the wall in order that from a plurality, from a multiplicity of
monads results a unity, a secondary unity: the unity of the lived body will be that of the
vinculum, that is, of the wall. You will ask me, where does the wall come from? What is this
wall? We will see. It’s a secondary unity; it’s a unity of stitching, and that’s what is going to be
constitutive of the lived body. Otherwise, for the lived body, there would be no unity; there
would be neither lived nor living body. So, if you will, Comtesse’s intervention is all the better
as it allows those who wish it to create the unity with this kind of grouping of problems: Leibniz,
Husserl, and even Sartre, once it’s been said that Leibniz… Husserl explicitly refers to it; it
would be somewhat arbitrary if there weren’t this explicit reference in the fifth Meditation.
[Pause] Yes, is this ok?

So then, we tell ourselves, a genesis is necessary, yes indeed. You see our problem: a genesis is
necessary. In the end, this is what I insist on – what a shame we aren’t ending with this because I
wasn’t insisting on anything else – these are the two aspects of the event. [Pause] At that point,
there would be practical examinations (épreuves pratiques): lessons on a topic, written questions:
Does the real virtual (virtuel réel) exist? [Pause] Second question: is the actual indeed possible?
(est-ce qu’il y a de l’actuel possible ?)

It’s very embarrassing. Look, if you read the commentators on Leibniz, it’s very embarassing:
possible, virtual, actual, real, are used by them in any old way, I believe, well not by all of them.
It’s really annoying if they use [these terms] any old way. Once again, you have your two very
different lines. It’s as if we were confusing the two floors. [Pause] Some possible realizes itself,
but it’s always, when some possible realizes itself in Leibniz, look at the context. Obviously, you
will always find examples that don’t go in this direction, but that doesn’t matter. When some

                                                                                                     12

possible realizes itself, it’s always in some world of matter, some body. [Pause] When some
virtual actualizes itself, it’s always in a soul. [Pause]

So now we grasp fully the two floors, and we’d say that a weaving is needed between the two, a
knot, a vinculum, so that what? It’s your choice! So that the lower floor might exist, so that the
existing lower floor might have any rapport whatsoever with the upper floor. In the end, there
will be lots of answers.

In a sense, that would give us an ending. I was telling you, at the start of the year, I was telling
you: yes, you know, the Baroque, we are going act as if we grasped a definition, and then we will
see quite well where that leads us. And I was telling you that the Baroque is not making folds
because we always make folds, everyone has always been making them. It’s that [in the
Baroque] folds might extend to infinity. And on this [point], what is fine, otherwise nothing
matters, [is] I was, I was a bit, how to say this, one can’t just do any old thing when one is too
completely sure of oneself. So I wasn’t sure that this would work all the way to the end.

And then, really, several days ago I stumbled on some catalogues of El Greco: it’s frightening,
it’s frightening, it’s frightening. It’s frightening not only due to its beauty, but what does this
beauty of El Greco mean? Of course, everything is not of the same value; of course, all the
paintings do not have that same kind of expression (formule). He created – fine, I cannot place it
– he created seven or eight “Christ in the Garden of Olives”. There is one in England, in London
that is so strange because, and I cite this because it’s the proof of our hypothesis, everything in it
is folds, there are only folds, that’s all there is! And the folds are distributed over three registers:
[Pause] folds of fabric, and it’s not in the sense in which every fabric then makes folds! If you
look at a reproduction of this painting, so it’s Christ’s tunic in which the folds are so developed,
pleats reconnecting into each other. It’s a fantastic study of folds. Folds of boulders; the boulder
is in painting perhaps what is folded as much as cloth. The boulder-folding! And to this he adds a
treatment of clouds that is a veritable fold, cloud-folding. There is voluntarily a manner of
treating the clouds, just as he treated the boulders in a certain form, and in the entire painting,
there is this circulation of three sorts of fold that truly connects to infinity.17

Now that we are reaching the end, I would say to you: well yeah, what are we doing? It’s this
story of the folds of the soul. Once again, the folds in the soul, that comes from the event being
included in the monad. [Pause] And then there are the pleats of matter. And between the two,
what is there? There is this stitching, this vinculum substantialae that arises there, just before
[Leibniz’s] death, and that is going then to confer -- suddenly I ask myself if I would stop as
quickly as I was thinking… it matters little -- which is going to confer textures on matter, for we
will have to consider – us, I mean; there are people who have already done so -- the textures of
matter. Leibniz uses the word, he uses the word “textura”, also at the end of his life. He must
have had so many ideas. There are these textures of matter, which normally ought to belong to a
Physics of matter, and to an Aesthetics of matter after all. An Aesthetics of textures, there is no
more difficult a notion, in my opinion, it’s so much more beautiful – it’s not in order to attack the
notion of “structure,” but I tell myself that anyway, it’s been quite a few years that we’ve been
talking about structure so much. It’s not that there was anything too wrong with that, we did …
quite well. But what if we gave ourselves a bit of a break in order to go towards some other
notions that have remained…

                                                                                                   13

"Texture" is an extremely difficult notion to analyze. I am speaking for you; at your age, or in
your research projects, I would say that if it happened to some among you: look also at the
richness of the material regarding textures. I mean, there is “industrial material”, very good for
the moment; be competitive, but one of the least studied materials, and perhaps the most
important, is painting. The great painters of textures are not at all unknowns (pas n’importe qui),
and one would find that these are kinds of modern Baroques. I don’t know myself, one has to see
if, among the great Baroque painters, there is already what might be recognized really as radical
textures. – [Deleuze speaks directly to one of the students] This was for you, if you can take that
on a bit more than you already have, since you have already begun to … -- I see three great
modern painters of textures; it’s up to you to go see [for yourself], and I am certainly forgetting
some: [Jean] Fautrier; [Jean] Dubuffet who rightfully recognized his debt to Fautrier since
Dubuffet constantly uses the word structure; and Paul Klee. It’s nonetheless not by chance that
they have something in common and that they are not completely unknown to one another.

I was saying that [Deleuze coughs forcefully] because we find ourselves facing… In the end,
what brings the folds of the soul into the pleats of matter and the pleats of matter into the folds of
the soul? At the same time, that bothers me because we had wagered that all of this might hold
together without stitching. [Laughter] And there we are perhaps needing some stitching, the
stitching passing through the living body, without which the inorganic body would not be a real
body, would purely be an imaginary body, and without which the monad, closed in on itself, etc.,
could not connect with anything else. [Pause] A break, ok? Five minute break? But I beg you not
to come back after fifteen minutes. [Break in class and in the recording, then return] [1:22:09]*

Deleuze: … for our, for our requirement … [Pause] Yes?

A student: On Christ. Is Christ a monad who says: I am incarnate, me, am I incarnate? Does this
in a certain manner realize the incarnation of a monad? Would Christianity or Christ himself be a
specific event?

Deleuze: There we have it. That’s not difficult; I will answer quickly because the more a
question is “fundamental”, the more one must answer quickly. [Laughter] Above all, one must
not say, but that’s not important because it wasn’t what you had in mind, but it was in the way
you formed what you said; above all, one must not identify monad with event. The event is what
happens and what occurs. The monad is what contains what happens and what occurs. The event
is crossing the Rubicon, the monad is Caesar. And it’s, above all, on the one hand, the monadevent distinction that we always need to make. Second point: the monad is never incarnate.
There is no incarnation of the monad for one simple reason: the monad suffices fully and entirely
to itself without doors or windows. When we say, to move quickly, that the monad has a body,
this means that in the domain of bodies, something carries over into a particular monad.

So if Christ is incarnate, he is incarnate exactly as all monads are incarnate. This is even no
doubt the model of incarnation. Does Christ pose particular problems? Yes! But strangely not at
the level of incarnation, in Leibniz. He posed some very particular problems on the level of
transubstantiation. And transubstantiation is not incarnation; it’s trans-carnation where the body
and blood of Christ become bread and wine. You see? So he poses a special problem in the sense
of passage from one body to another, the passage from Christ’s body to the bread and body.

                                                                                                  14

Having said this, personally Leibniz is Protestant and does not believe in the transubstantiation,
but he agrees to give some help to reverend Des Bosses who is greatly concerned about this
topic, and he [Leibniz] tells Des Bosses – it’s at a rather lively moment in the correspondence
with reverend Des Bosses – if I were you (this is not my problem, not my business), but if I were
you, I would say something like this, something like that, and he give one of Leibniz’s strangest
interpretations of transubstantiation that ought to delight everyone, and that must have been
useful no doubt to certain Catholics because reverend Des Bosses seems rather quite happy. In
any case, as concerns Christ and incarnation, to my knowledge, he has no special position except
that that he is certainly the archetype or model of incarnation.

So, I am saying let’s start over on our genesis. But you remember that I had already demanded
this the last time: above all, don’t get it backwards, although one is constantly tempted to get it
backwards. You recall this genesis that consists of: starting form the monad, the monad contains
everything, it expresses the entire world. It expresses the entire universe. Only careful: it has a
small, privileged region that it expresses specially or clearly. We saw this. Here, I’d say, is the
first proposition. Second proposition: so I have a body. That’s what we have to understand. So I
have a body. [Pause] In fact, this could not be otherwise. It might be more convenient perhaps to
say: I have a body, so I express a privileged region! The only thing that is certain is that the
privileged region, my little subdivision that I express clearly, once it’s said that I express the
entire world, but I express it obscurely and in a confused way.

Sense already everything that we won’t have time to do. You foresee that there are all kinds of
monads in Leibniz, that there are some very different statuses of monads. For example, a
butterfly does not connect to a monad like you or me. There is a whole hierarchy of monads.
There is a grand hierarchy of monads. So one has to wonder: are there monads that express
nothing clearly, that don’t have a special region? In this, the texts are very difficult, [and] one
would have to undertake some very close readings of these texts. Leibniz varies according to the
occasions. According to the occasions, he suggests that certain monads remain in complete
darkness. There are others that, for a certain period of time, express a tiny clear region. In my
opinion, animals have a monad that expresses necessarily a tiny clear region. For example, a cow
expresses clearly its field. [Pause] Only, from the fact that it expresses its field clearly, it
expresses closer and closer the surrounding world, the entire universe. Even a cow has a clear
zone of expression, and if we transport it to another field, it changes its clear expression. So this
is already not that easy. But, so even for animals.

And in other texts, Leibniz seems to tell us that it’s only reasonable souls that have a clear zone
of expression. This isn’t possible. [Pause] This would raise for us some… But I am saying, your
clear zone of expression is what concerns your body, and with this, we don’t have the time.
There are numerous texts, in the Letters to Arnauld notably. I cite page 215, in the excerpts
selected by Madame Prenant: “I had said that the soul, naturally expressing the entire universe in
a certain sense, and according to the rapport that the other bodies have with one’s own” -- and
according to the relation that other bodies have to one’s own. That’s what defines my clear
region: everything that affects my body, in fact. And in a certain way, that indeed must pass
through my body. And you see, I cannot say, first of all, I express clearly what passes through
my body, and second of all, the monad. Why? Because what is first is the monad without doors
or windows. Why does it have a clear region of expression? Because it has a certain number of

                                                                                                    15

singularities around which it is constituted. Consequently, I am saying [Interruption of the
WebDeleuze text; transcript follows the recording] everything that it expresses clearly concerns
my body and affects my body and passes through my body.

Only, that’s not easy. They have to state immediately their objection: but my body, I don’t know
it at all. If I treat it like perception in the monad, well, this is a singularly confused perception.
You remember? I express the universe in a confused way; let’s accept this. If there is my body in
the universe, I express my body, agreed, but I express it in a confused way, in a dim way
(obscurément). The movements of my lymph: this is what Arnauld objects. Arnauld objects,
well, you grasp the movements of your lymph, And the movements of your blood, you grasp
them very, very dimly, in a very confused way. How can you say that you express clearly what
concerns your body and what passes through your body when, in fact, you don’t express your
body at all clearly? Look, this first … You express everything, agreed, but you express
everything in the dark. This is the dark depth of the monad. We have seen it. You express
everything in confusion. So you express your heartbeats, your arteries, the movement of your
blood, all that. You can always say that you express it, but you express it in a very, very
confused way, and then you are going to tell us, on the other hand, that what you express clearly
when you say, “Ah, there, this is green grass,” that even a bull or a cow have done? They say,
there it is, it’s green grass, and there it [the cow] has finally expressed something clearly. And
it’s because it doesn’t pass through its body, how do we deal with that? And I believe this to be
one of the most astonishing things from Des Bosses-Leibniz.

And a second problem – that was a first problem – a second problem is: in what way isn’t having
a body [Pause] simply a perception? In what way is the body an object of perception? What
makes me not say “I perceive my body” as I perceive green, predicate of the monad? But I say
moreover, I say that I have a body, [Pause] and not the monad, but me, I am composed [Pause]
of a monad and a lived body. [Return to the WebDeleuze transcript] What allows me to affirm
the body as object of perception? And on these two points, on these two problems, I must say
that Leibniz’s answers are astonishing. I would just like to give them to you so that you might
reflect on them.

First answer: what explains that the body, that I only grasp confusedly, that my body can be said
at the same time to be the condition through which [Pause] is transmitted to me (se rapporte à
moi), through which passes everything that is transmitted to me, everything that I express clearly,
the small portion that I express clearly? I am trying to relate this to you because… You will find
in Leibniz all kinds of texts saying, generally, this: there are tiny unconscious perceptions, and
with these tiny unconscious perceptions, we create a conscious perception. [Pause] Moreover,
that’s what the meaning of the organs is. And some examples that he willingly gives are: you
don’t hear the sound of a drop of water if it’s far away, you don’t even hear the sound of a far-off
wave, and then you hear something, little by little the wave [comes] closer, the wave is like that,
it tells a tale like everyone; the wave is close, until it becomes a conscious perception: the sound
of the sea. Or again he says: you don’t hear what each person is saying in the crowd, but you
hear the brouhaha. [Pause] There are lots of texts by Leibniz going in this direction. And we’d
like to interpret them in the sense of part-whole.18 Oh well yes, it’s very simple: one doesn’t
perceive the parts, but one perceives the whole.

                                                                                                    16

Or else that reminds us of something in psychophysics. And a psychologist, at the time of my
baccalauréat [roughly, high school finals] was extremely annoying, named [Gustav] Fechner. He
was trying to establish a rapport between the increase of excitation and the emergence of
sensation. It’s that the bachot (baccalauréat) is always a terrible thing, since Fechner is a
nineteenth-century philosopher who is quite remarkable. And he has as a remarkable trait to be
Leibnizian, so this is why it’s less astounding that he’d be the author of psychophysics.
Moreover, far from being a positivist scholar, as we are made to believe in psychophysics -- it’s
not a compliment -- I would say that he’s a kind of grandiose madman (fou grandiose), a very
great German Romantic. So it’s rather strange that a great Romantic attracted to German
Romanticisms, or perhaps to post-Romanticism, it’s very strange that he created this discipline,
but in the end, this matters little.19

If you look at the texts, I have the impression that we are going to realize something much more
curious, in the end, than that. [Pause] Try to understand, it’s not hard to understand, just a bit of
infinitesimal calculus, at a basic level, entirely basic. You have two quantities x and y as
variables. You can submit them to increases and to decreases of any sort. We call them, for
example, D small a, D small b, whatever you want. And then you can make them undergo any
increases or decreases whatever. [Pause] No, rather [let’s say] D small x, D small y. And then
you can make them undergo additions and subtractions, [End of the Web Deleuze transcript; the
remaining transcript is from the recording] smaller than any given quantity. [Pause] We would
call them, let’s say, Delta x and Delta y. [Pause] At the extreme, Delta x equals zero, Delta y
equals zero. You’ll write Delta y over Delta x equals zero over zero. Is this ok? It’s not too
difficult.

I’ll read you a text by Leibniz, and you’ll immediately understand. [Deleuze looks up the text]
“These are not absolutely nothings” – Delta x and Delta y – “These are not absolutely nothings;
they are nothings only comparatively,” that is, Delta x equals zero in relation to x; Delta y equals
zero in relation to y. – You’ll correct this; I’m so tired (abruti) that if I make a… But I think that
this is quite simple. – However, Delta x and Delta y are still not the same thing and are not
equivalent. I’ll demonstrate this easily… Will you do it for me, go to the board? [Interruption,
different movements in the room; Deleuze asks help from the students with what he wants to
display on the board] Voilà. [Deleuze watches the student, Richard Pinhas, who is writing the
mathematical example on the board; pause of approximately 2 minutes]

Richard Pinhas: Is that ok, what I’ve written?

Deleuze: That’s fine. You have to understand, there’s a small problem: it’s that x [Pause;
Deleuze reads what’s on the board and hesitates, gives more instructions] – Place a big C…
[Pinhas: Here?] and place a small c from A to C [Pinhas: A small c from A to C] and x by
convention is equal to Ax [Pinhas follows the instructions while repeating them[ such that Cx
equals Ax less Ac… Ok? [Pinhas: That’s good] That’s good. Everything is fine. [Pause; several
students ask questions about this presentation on the board] Eh? [Deleuze provides more
instruction to Pinhas; someone asks: But where is it, the big X?] Obviously, you cannot see it
[probably hidden at the bottom of the board where a student is sitting]; this is going to end up
badly like that other time. [Laughter]

                                                                                                      17

Good. Let’s look at the minimum, ok? Do you want me to read the text? It’s beautiful, it’s quite
beautiful. This will give you an idea of mathematical style of… [Deleuze does not read the text,
but continues to have corrections made on the board] Be open solely to this: the line Cy, and E,
capital E, [Deleuze indicates the board] E and Cy are transported in parallel to themselves
toward A. What’s happening? E tends toward zero, C tends toward zero. There we are. This is
the whole mystery that you must understand. You have to understand that both of them tend
toward zero, but they never become equal. Why? Because if they became equal, it would be
necessary to, to what? It would be necessary that y, little y, the side A, little y, and the big Cy –
are we giving it a name, the big Cy? – become equal as well. And, when you’ve obtained the
coincidence in A, you’ve maintained your triangle, A-x-y, with its difference between x, that is,
between Ax, and Ey. So, C and E can coincide with A without losing their relation of the kind,
so we’ll call it a kind, let’s say, differential rapport, Delta y over Delta x. Is this ok? Is it ok more
or less?

Here’s what I am suggesting for you when you read these texts by Leibniz about the sea, etc. In
the end, it’s not at all a question of the whole-part problem. What is it about? It’s about
conditions in which a differential rapport has occurred in a way to produce something, [Pause] in
a way to produce, we must add almost, indirectly. [Pause] Delta y over Delta x, you assimilate
them to what? I need to have two terms. What’s going to be annoying in reading these texts by
Leibniz is if I only hold onto one term, water. But I must have two terms, otherwise that makes
no sense. I need to have “water” and “the ear”. [Pause] You have to consider the differential of
water, let’s say, the… -- in these texts, it’s deliberate, it’s not even science; it’s the way that, if
you will, we can make a kind of mathematical allusion – you have to consider the differential of
water, let’s say, the drop, the smallest drop, [Pause] and the differential of the ear in such a way
that the whole text ought to be rewritten under the form Delta y over Delta x. [Pause] What are
we told from differential calculus in the, in the most elementary way?… [Interruption of the
recording] [1:51:27]

Part 4

… So, that works, and I insist on this greatly because I am struck by… Here I believe that the
interpretations are going, generally that they are going… [Pause; Deleuze doesn’t complete the
sentence] I consider a different example, the eye. It’s the same thing, eh? I am looking at my
field, I have a Delta x that is [Pause] grass, some grass, a tiny bit of grass, the smallest bit of
grass. I have a Delta y, the tiniest, the tiniest glance, [Pause] Delta y over Delta x. – No, I cannot
rightly say green; I am saying green grass. I withdraw the green; I especially haven’t said
green… I didn’t say it? [The student near Deleuze recites: A tiny bit of grass] Ah, that’s it, I’m
ok, the tiny bit of grass, and then my glance from the eye – Delta y over Delta x, no matter the
conditions – here, in certain conditions, you can invent them biologically… I’m rather close, I’m
rather close, I am awake, all that – Delta y over Delta x equals, equals what? The green, a green
patch in the monad, a perception of green. This is an entire theory of perception.20 You’ll tell me
that matter really must act. No, not at all, for the moment, not at all. [Pause] You have some
matter, there, you’re going to have it; we’ll see, you’re going to have it. You have a body, you
have a body.

                                                                                                   18

What I am in the process of explaining is how the most confused thing in the world is able to
give you, or to communicate to the monad, a clear perception. With Delta y over Delta x, or
rather to Delta y over Delta x corresponds – I’m saying nothing more than “corresponds” – a
perception included in the monad: it’s some green. – [As in the previous session, the sound of a
squeaking door is heard] What is that? [A student near Deleuze: It’s the door] [Laughter] – I’d
say that it’s a causality, it’s a causality, but a very odd one. It’s a causality between terms that
don’t need to have anything whatsoever in common, what Leibniz would call an ideal causality.
[Pause] I would explain the perception of green through Delta y over Delta x, of two bodily
elements, the bit of grass, the glance from the eye.

Second argument, also very strange, a completely different argument: I am returning to my
beaten dog or to the pin that is stuck when I am a poor little baby drinking his milk, the pin that
my nursemaid cruelly sticks in me. [Laughter] So then, I feel a pain. However, Leibniz says, it’s
odd because this pain does not resemble [Pause] the pin’s movement. [Pause] And there’s no
doubt, right? [Pause] Likewise, the pain of the dog receiving the blow from the stick does not
resemble the striking stick.

So I’d almost like, I’d like to take you as witness. There are two extraordinary texts, in my view,
extraordinary texts by Leibniz. -- I think I’ve lost them so that… Aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe, aïe,
aïe… I really better not have… [Pause; Deleuze looks through his texts] No, it’s not that one…
[Deleuze keeps looking for the texts] It doesn’t matter because I have it elsewhere, but I don’t
have… [Pause] And not here either… But I am going to find it, you know. It does exist. [Pause]
[A groan of frustration from Deleuze]… Ha, ha! There it is!

So, in all this, I’ve completely lost my effect because I no longer recall… [Laughter] [Pause]
Here we are… [Pause; Deleuze continues to look in the text] I am trying to cut the text because
I’m not managing… [Pause]21 "And although it is true that their entire explication is beyond our
forces" – he is saying, look, already to explain all that is really outside our strength – “because of
the too great multitude of enveloped varieties, we are no less penetrated more and more by
experiences that make us discover the bases of distinct thoughts of which light and colors
provide us with examples. These confused feelings” – colors and light – “are not arbitrary” –
these are perceptions, right, in the monads – “These confused feelings are not arbitrary, and we
do not agree with the received opinion today of several people and supported by our author” –
this about [John] Locke – “that there are no resemblances or rapports between our sensations and
corporeal traces.” This is indeed our problem: there is a resemblance between the sensations in
the monad and the corporeal traces of the body, in the body.

“It seems rather that our feelings represent them and express them perfectly. Someone will
perhaps say that the feeling of heat does not resemble movement” -- Someone will perhaps say
that the feeling of heat does not resemble movement – “Yes! No doubt. It does not resemble a
sensible movement such as that of a carriage wheel. But it resembles the assemblage of a
thousand tiny movements of fire and organs that are its cause. Similarly, whiteness does not
resemble a spherical convex mirror” -- [Pause] whiteness does not resemble a spherical convex
mirror – “However, it is nothing other than the assemblage of quantities of tiny convex mirrors
such as we see in the foam by looking at it closely.” But he says an astonishing thing; he says
one thing: you never find a resemblance between perception and the perceived object if you keep

                                                                                                   19

yourself within the limits of the fixed. If you pass on to the infinitesimal, you will then find
yourself before white as sensation and an infinity of tiny convex mirrors. What is the
resemblance of both? Foam. [Pause]

The other text, you’re going to see its… I only know two of them by Leibniz. It’s New Essays on
Human Understanding, book 1. [Pause] He says this: before me, you know, philosophers have
distinguished two kinds of qualities, primary qualities and secondary qualities. The primary
qualities are extension, etc.; the secondary qualities are sensible qualities. And they said, at the
extreme, primary qualities resemble the object, but secondary qualities are subjective like color,
heat, and nothing corresponds to them in the object, at least nothing direct. And here is what he
says in this text of the New Essays:

“I just noted how there is a resemblance or exact rapport regarding secondary qualities as well as
regarding primary qualities.” For him, a resemblance has to go all the way there. This is
enormous if you see what he means, what he is in the process of doing. One must master the
confused insofar as it’s confused, if he finds a resemblance. If he finds a law of resemblance
through the confused itself, well it’s a fantastic plus for him. “It is indeed reasonable that the
effect responds to its cause; and how does one guarantee the opposite since we don’t know at all
distinctly either the sensation of blue, for example, or the movements that produce it?” Hence the
text that I wanted to reach: “It is true that pain does not resemble the movements of a pin” – the
same thing, you recall; the other text said, it’s true that white does not resemble a convex mirror -
- “It is true that pain does not resemble the movements of a pin, but it can resemble quite well the
movements that this pin causes in our body.”

This, I’d tell you… This is a text that doesn’t seem like much. What is he doing? I am
commenting on a phrase: “It is true that pain does not resemble the movements of a pin,” which
is not in the finest conditions of a proof. If I have a chance, I am not going to establish a term to
term rapport, movement of the pin [to] pain, “but it can resemble quite well the movements that
this pin causes in our body.” There, I have two terms, and furthermore, two terms that pass, that
tend toward the infinitely small. As my wicked nursemaid moved the pin toward my body, this
was a finite movement, but there, when she presses it into my poor body and turns it, [Laughter]
you see, there I find myself faced with two corporeal factors. I find myself in the presence of a
Delta y and a Delta x, and it’s this Delta y and this Delta x to which pain corresponds in the
monad. And likewise for the white: as long as I was trying to place into connection [Pause] [The
student near Deleuze tells him: Mirror] convex mirror [to] white, this was stupid. What I had to
do was place into connection, on one hand, a material rapport, infinitely tiny mirrors and foam as
physical phenomena, and it’s to this Delta y over Delta x rapport that will correspond the white
in the soul. In both cases, you have pain in the soul equals Delta y over Delta x in the body,
[Pause] and I believe that this is the only way to interpret these texts, in any case, these two
great, these two great texts by Leibniz, in such a condition, I am saying, what it is that makes me
have a body.

There we are. So I can summarize in order to finish. I have a body. Why do I have a body ? It’s a
consequence, nothing else than a consequence. I have a body because that results – this is a
genetic point of view – that results from me having a clear region of expression. We especially
must not reverse the causality. It’s the body that results from my clear region and not the reverse.

                                                                                                                20

Second statute of the genesis: [Pause] Why am I sure about having a body? [Pause] Because
what I express clearly in my monad corresponds to my body, because what I express clearly in
my monad corresponds to something of the Delta y over Delta x kind, [Pause] which is like the
ideal cause or the object, and the resembling object of my perception. So there is a resembling
object of my perception, so there is an ideal cause of my perception, and it’s not only my body,
but the rapport of my body to all other bodies. We find ourselves henceforth faced with two
kinds of rapport, a rapport of bodies between one another to infinity, a rapport of monads
between one another to infinity. This is not the same type of rapport, for a simple reason: it’s that
bodies exert a direct causality on each other, whereas monads do nothing other than inter-express
themselves, that is, express a one and same world, each one being without doors or windows.

There we have it; this is what I wanted… The next time, you’ll tell me if… and then we will
draw some new conclusions, and we will begin the story of harmony. You sense why we have
reached harmony: it’s because, between all these operations of the body and all these operations
of monads, there has to be something that implicates itself as harmony.

A student: Can you give us the references for the two texts [by Leibniz]?

Deleuze: Eh, New Essays, book 1… Yes, in fact, for me, these two Leibniz texts are essential.
Eh, book 2, New Essays, chapter 8, and the other, [Pause; Deleuze looks in his text and consults
the student next to him] in the Guérard edition, eh? Volume 4, [Pause; noises of students leaving]
page 575, and the title is… [Pause] Eh, the title is complicated because… [Pause] That
[reference] depends on if you have another edition… [Pause] This belongs [Pause] to texts
among a whole group entitled “Explication of the new system concerning the union of the soul
and the body”, and this precise text is “Addition to the explication.” [End of the recording]
[2:14:11]

Notes

  The announcement with which this session starts – Deleuze’s explanation that this annual seminar on Leibniz will
be his last, for reasons of health, as active professor– is no doubt an enormous moment for all the participants.
Consequently, as he says, this session and the two that follow will be the final sessions of the year and of his
teaching career. However, those students and friends close to Deleuze surely were not taken by surprise since he
seems to have made his intentions known earlier on, e.g. in a letter of 29 December 1986 to Arnaud Villani in
Deleuze, Letters and Other Texts, ed. David Lapoujade (2015; Cambridge/New York: The MIT Press/Semiotext(e),
2020), p.66.
  Deleuze’s summary appears to return to the discussion in chapter 7 of The Fold (University of Minnesota Press,
1993), pp. 94-95; Le Pli (Minuit, 1988), pp. 126-127.
  Deleuze develops this line of thought in The Logic of Sense (Columbia University Press, 1990), Twenty-First
Series on the Event.
  Deleuze discusses the complaint in similar terms in “J as in Joy” in L’Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze (Gilles
Deleuze, From A to Z, Semiotext(e), 2011).
  Here, Deleuze returns to the development corresponding to chapter 8, “The Two Floors”, in The Fold, cf. pp. 104105; Le Pli, pp. 140-141.
  The French recording indicates: “Le président Des Bosses”, but as Deleuze referred to Des Bosses as “the reverend
father” in the 7 April session, I revise accordingly.
  While Conley translates réalisant as the realizing, I follow the translation used in The Leibniz-Des Bosses
Correspondence, ed. Brandon C. Look and Donald Rutherford (Yale University Press, 2007).

                                                                                                                     21

  The Leibniz-Des Bosses Correspondence, p. 337.
  Cf. these distinctions introduced in the early seminar sessions, 28 October and 4 November 1986, and in the
opening lines of chapter 1, The Pleats of Matter, The Fold, pp. 3-4; Le Pli, pp. 5-6. “The Two Floors” is the title of
the penultimate chapter.
   See The Fold, p. 107; Le Pli, p. 143, where Deleuze refers to this text by Husserl.
   On appurtenances and Husserl, cf. chapter 8 of The Fold, pp. 106-107; Le Pli, pp. 142-143.
   See the session’s opening question above.
   A version of the drawing that follows is located in The Fold, p. 105; Le Pli, p. 140.
   For another drawing that includes some of these same elements, cf. The Fold, p. 105; Le Pli, p. 140.
   On the “substantial vinculum”, cf. The Fold, pp. 110-111; Le Pli, pp. 148-150.
   On the vinculum and the following discussion of the echo and the wall, cf. The Fold, pp. 112-113; Le Pli, pp.150152.
   On the fold that goes to infinity and on El Greco (briefly), cf. start of chapter 9 in The Fold, pp. 123-124; Le Pli,
pp. 164-165.
   Deleuze describes this process in terms of “accord” in chapter 9 of The Fold, pp. 130-131; Le Pli, pp. 178-179]
   Deleuze refers to Fechner in The Fold, pp. 92, 97; Le Pli, pp. 123, 130.
   On this theory and these mathematical formulae regarding perception of green (and other examples), see The
Fold, pp. 87-90; Le Pli, pp. 116-119.
   This citation appears in The Fold, p. 95; Le Pli, p. 127, and in footnote 26 (p. 156), Deleuze notes that “the two
basic texts are Addition à l’explication du système nouveau . . . and Nouveaux essais, II, chap. 8, paras. 13-15.” At
the session’s end, Deleuze provides the reference to a student.