Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema and Thought, 1984-1985

Lecture 12, 05 February 1985 (Cinema Course 78)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Laura Cécilia Nicolas (Part 1), Désirée Lorenz (Part
2) and Pierre Carles (Part 3); additional revisions to the transcription and time stamp:
Charles J. Stivale

Translation: Graeme Thomson & Silvia Maglioni

Part 1

... Who knows the dates of the mid-term vacations? I think that there are students here who
frequent other departments, right? Or other courses? No, no. Everything's clear.

So, we'll have an active break this time that won’t consist in you going across the concourse
for coffee but instead I'm going to ask three volunteer messengers – three, because of
possible contradictions – three messengers to go across the concourse and report back to me
the dates of the vacations, the main question being… please understand how important this
is… do they start on the 11th? Will we already be on vacation after this session? Or do they
start on the 14th, in which case we still have one session? This isn’t a minor question, it's a
very important one. But I have the feeling that there are some here who should know…

Student: I think it's the 11th.

Deleuze: You think it's the 11th? I think it's the 11th too.

A student: No, I don't think so.

Deleuze: We can decide on the 11th… and if it isn't the 11th, that would make it three weeks.
That sounds reasonable but it's better to confirm it. No, perhaps I’m not going to send you
because you'd tell me it's the 14th. You're not a good messenger.

A student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: What?... Oh, well then, fine. So, three of you will ask for confirmation... this is what
we should do. Okay.

Student: [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: It's chilly, isn't it? Well, let's move on. I'd just like to make it very clear to all of you
how the different elements of our current research link up. This is precisely what I'd like you
to bear in mind for today's session. For some time now, we've been searching for a formal
definition of the series, a formal definition of the series. Once again, it wasn't simply a
question of taking the characteristics of a musical series and applying them. In terms of the
problem of images, it was a question of constructing our own criteria for the series, making

use, naturally, of certain notions borrowed from music, but no more than that. And the formal
definition of a series was: a series of images reflected in a concept, genre or category, or
rather in something that functions as a concept, genre or category, something of the order of
images.

To this, we added two remarks: this concept, genre or category could perfectly well be
individualized or personalized. And, secondly, the series thus defined – as a sequence of
images reflected, or reflecting in a genre, concept or category – could be constructed in two
ways: horizontally, where the genre appeared as a limit, or vertically, where the genre itself
constituted an autonomous series, in which case two series were superimposed.

Examples were provided by or in Godard's cinema, the horizontal construction being of the
type: a sequence of images reflected in a genre, this genre intervening as a limit, for example
theatricalization as a limit of everyday attitudes in a film like Une femme est une femme
[1961]. In the other type of series, the vertical construction appeared when the limit or, rather,
when the genre – instead of functioning as a limit of the preceding images – itself developed
into a series, into a sequence of images juxtaposed with the first sequence, and this was the
case with the two superimposed sequences both in Passion [1982], where the genre itself
provided a pictorial or para-pictorial sequence, and even more clearly in Prénom Carmen
[1983] where the genre itself produced a musical sequence in which the other sequence of
images was reflected. So, there was a superimposition of series, a vertical construction of the
series.

So, this is what we had attained… unless some of you want to go back over it, in which case
all you have to do is say so. But as I was saying, we haven't solved the whole problem
through this formalism of the series, or through this formal determination of cinematographic
series or series of images. We haven’t solved everything, because we still have one problem:
not what constitutes the form of the series, but what will be the content of the series, what is
the content of the series and no longer what is its form. And from the point of view of
content, we established or constructed… through certain texts that we looked at or began to
look at last time, we constructed a second type of definition that was a material definition
rather than simply a formal one. This time, a series appeared as a sequence of attitudes
reflected in a gestus. Note that luckily enough these two determinations echo and even refer
to one another. We've only gone far enough to intuit these. I mean, given that the series is a
sequence of images reflected in a genre, the question of content is: What kind of image can be
reflected in a genre?

The first answer, which we haven't explored at all, but which for us represents a working
hypothesis, is that the sequence of images that are normally or regularly destined to be
reflected in a genre are images that present bodily attitudes. But taken in terms of their
content, that is, taken as attitudes, in what are they reflected? As we were saying, they are
reflected in what we call a gestus, a gest. And here again, there was a new correspondence, so
it was a reason for us – from the moment we grasped, or even sensed, these correspondences
– it was a reason for us to tell ourselves we were on the right path. Because, in fact, there is a
new correspondence between genre, or concept, from the point of view of formal definition,
and gestus, from the point of view of material definition. Why is this? Because it seemed to
us that this gestus, in the work of the very author from whom we borrowed this notion,
namely [Bertolt] Brecht, was implicitly linked to the idea of a coherent discourse
corresponding to attitudes, where the coherent discourse was implied…. where the virtual
discourse was implied by a bodily attitude, or more precisely, as Brecht put it, where the

decision was presupposed by the attitude. So, our two definitions, the formal definition and
the material definition, could be mapped out quite closely. Again, I want to insist on this, so it
all becomes quite clear.

And so we'd have a kind of double difference. I mean, the series became a kind of very
delicate narrow thread, a very taut thread that passed or zigzagged between – how shall I put
it? – it zigzagged between things, between givens from which it stood out. It zigzagged
between what it was not. You see where we are: if it's true that the series is formally a
sequence of images reflected in a genre, but not every image can be reflected in a genre, and
if it's also true that the series is precisely a sequence of attitudes reflected in a gestus, the
series is therefore a void between things that it is not, and with which it must not be confused.

So, thirdly, we need to define the series in terms of a set of differences and distinctions it
maintains in relation to the things it should not be confused with. And at this point, we could
identify those things with which neither the series nor the elements brought into play by the
series should be confused. The elements brought into play by the series are: image, insofar as
it is reflected in a genre, and attitude insofar as it is reflected in a gestus. Notice how there's a
literary advantage for us in all this, a literary advantage this time that will enable us to define
what we call a gest, or the gest, in a way that, so it seems to me, is much more, much more…
well, that’s different to the way it’s usually defined. I mean, a certain number of literary
critics have taken an interest in what has been called a gest, the origin of which appears to be
Scandinavian, though there are also Greek gests.

And gest is not the same thing as the epic, it's not the same as myth, it's not the same as
tragedy, although the epic has elements of gest, as does tragedy. And what we call gest, a
gest, is a very special genre in literature, hence the interest for us in trying to find a definition
for this term, and for the moment, the one we do have is a story in which various attitudes are
reflected. Gest would be like discourse, the discourse in which a series of attitudes are
reflected. But then, I always come back to the question, in distinction to what? You see, I
have three levels: the need for a formal definition of the series, the need for a material
definition of the series and the need for a differential definition of the series. By differential, I
only mean to assign the differences between a series and what doesn't constitute a series,
what isn't a series. Is that clear? I feel I’m being very clear this morning.

[Someone arrives late]

Deleuze: You've missed the clearest part. That's a pity.

Student: What are we talking about?

Deleuze: What are we talking about? Well, what the series and the terms of the series as
we've just defined them must be distinguished from… So, I would say there are two things.
On one hand, attitude must be distinguished from any lived state, attitude must be
distinguished from lived experience. And lived experience has two meanings, very generally,
and here I'm not referring to anything in particular… I'm just saying that, conventionally
speaking, lived experience can be considered in two ways. Either it's... [Recording
interrupted] [18:42]

... it's a question, right? But you can see what we mean by the lived experience of a real
person. Like your experience, or mine. Or else a supposed experience, the supposed lived

experience of a fictional character, in which case the experience corresponds to a role. For
example, a fictional character on the screen or in the theater plays a role, the role of a
character who's grieving. The grief is the fictional character's lived experience insofar as this
fictional character is the role played by an actor. I would say that attitude must be
distinguished from these two aspects of lived experience, real experience and fictional
experience. Why do I say this? It's obvious. An attitude is not part of lived experience. We
constantly take attitudes from experience. But an attitude is not experience.

On the other hand, if attitude is to be distinguished from experience, in the same way gestus
must be distinguished from the story or, what amounts to the same thing, the action. And here
again, histoire has two meanings. Sometimes it means story, the plot of a fiction, sometimes
it means history, meaning the historicity of human deeds. Well, gestus can be distinguished
from both story and history. And why is this? Because it's not an action. It doesn't fit into the
scheme or the sequence of actions and reactions, whether fictional or historical stricto sensu.
As we saw last time, following [Roland] Barthes' remark, Mother Courage's gestus is not the
Thirty Years' War.

So, there you have it, my three determinations: formal determination, material determination,
differential determination. And so, the last time, granted this clarity, this absolute clarity, the
last time we ventured into the obscure. It was a question of trying to understand this attitudegestus link insofar as it distinguishes itself on one hand from lived experience and on the
other from story/history or action. And so, we ventured into a much more obscure realm
where the following things occurred. After a quick examination of Brecht's text, which
already raised a number of problems for us, we moved on to a commentary by Barthes.
Barthes' commentary suited us insofar as he told us, in one quick sentence, that the gestus is a
“coordination of attitudes”, and that the gestus is a signifying gesture, like Mother Courage
biting the coin to check that it's genuine. Okay, this helped us advance a lot, but at the same
time it didn't help us advance, it left us running on the spot. It was a confirmation that there
was a fundamental link between attitude and gestus, independent of experience and
historicity.1

Then we moved on to another Barthes text, this time distinguishing between the obvious
meaning and the obtuse meaning.2 And with much hesitation, we said to ourselves: Wouldn't
there be a link between these two texts, and wouldn't the meaning – what he calls in a very
mysterious way, it seemed to us, the obtuse meaning of the image – be a way of
characterizing the gestus? And why did we say this? Because in all of Barthes's examples, the
problem clearly focused – and this was even our reason for comparing the two texts – the
problem clearly focused on the notion of attitude. These were images that represented or
presented attitudes. And it was regarding these images that Barthes distinguished between an
obvious and an obtuse meaning. This raises four questions for us, which I'm not going to deal
with on my own.

The first question, which is very subsidiary – I'll give you all four, and then we'll see how we
can manage – the first question is very subsidiary: Is it fair to bring Barthes's two texts
together and establish a link between them, given that Barthes himself doesn't establish a link
between these two texts? I say this question is subsidiary because, in short, it can only be
answered after we’ve answered the other questions. So, far from being the first, it will be the
last. It will no longer be a problem. We'll only be able to answer yes or no after we've
answered the other questions.

Second question: What does Barthes… what does this obtuse sense that Barthes invokes
consist in? I tried to explain why I didn't understand, or even see very clearly, what he was
speaking about. So, it was vexing for me. After rereading the text, I see even less well, so it's
getting worse and worse. Third question. Sorry, second question… What is this… what is this
obtuse meaning? Even I understand well how subtle this is... I don't ask for definitions, just
for impressions, because Barthes doesn't summon definitions, he summons impressions. He
doesn't want to impose his point of view. He says, this is how it is for me, fine, no problem.
That's all we ask, to try to understand what he sees or what he's in the process of seeing.

Third question, where Barthes' thesis becomes solid… supposing we have understood the
obtuse meaning of the image, he says it has a privileged relation with the still. Not only a
privileged relation with the still, but that it can only be grasped by and in the still. This is a
very solid, very clear thesis. We don't yet know what this obtuse meaning is, but what we can
say is that, in any case, it can only be grasped in the still. Well, that's very clear. Many
questions arise for us at this third level. Does this mean that the obtuse meaning of the image
is a characteristic of photography?

That's not what Barthes means. So, what is the difference between a still and a photograph? It
will be important for us to use of our series of problems to try and make some headway on
this obscure question. Everyone knows that a still is not a photograph: what's the difference
between a still as a cinematographic element and a photograph? Barthes raises the question
and deals with it in a little note which he leaves incomplete and he knows this full well.3

And continuing with this same group of questions, in his consideration that the obtuse
meaning is fundamentally linked with the still, Barthes draws the idea that the obtuse
meaning and the still constitute the filmic in its pure state, the filmic in its pure state, beyond
all actual films, that is, purely filmic or – how shall I put it? – supra-cinematographic. And
he goes so far as to say that cinema hasn't begun, that cinema remains in its infancy, because
it hasn't yet unveiled or attained this pure element of the filmic, whose secret refers back to
the still. What can this mean? You see, this third question concerns the relation between
obtuse meaning and the still, and what constitutes the status of the still. Can we invoke the
still to erect the notion of a supra-cinematographic filmic?

Fourth question: this pure filmic or, if you prefer, the obtuse meaning as it appears in the still,
would be precisely a pure filmic because it lay beyond the movement-image. And being
beyond the movement-image, the filmic could not therefore be defined by the movementimage. Here too, Barthes' thesis is very solid. What's more, it would also be beyond the timeimage, at least in the sense of temporal succession, or chronological time, beyond the
chronological time-image.

And now, following in Barthes' footsteps, Raymonde Carasco, commenting on Barthes' essay
on the obtuse meaning, wants to go even further and tells us that this pure filmic is not only
beyond the movement-image and beyond the chronological time-image, but beyond the timeimage altogether, beyond all time-images, that is, beyond what I believe she calls inner
duration, beyond duration or, if you prefer, according to what we covered last year, beyond
what I would call non-chronological time.4

These are the three points, and the fourth, and the first and the fourth which depend on them,
but these are the three points we're going to deal with, relying on our excellent method, so
we'll now do… we'll again conduct a sort of interview. But at the same time I'd have to… at

the same time it's not to pose any limits, but I'd like you to agree to respond to these
questions, which doesn't mean you can't ask others of your own, or make your own
elaborations. So, okay...

[Moving away from the microphone Deleuze changes places with Raymonde Carasco.
Deleuze can be heard speaking as he sits down again]

Raymonde Carasco: It’s hard swapping places!

Deleuze: ... So, the obtuse meaning, we talked a little bit about this last time. I'll summarize
the position… [inaudible remarks] You, you have your position… [Inaudible remarks] you
see, you feel what it's like… [Inaudible remarks] okay. All I had left was... [Inaudible
remarks] once said that it concerns a sensation, to say he has this kind of sensation, it's a
feeling he has... [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Well, I think we're getting into… the obscure, let’s say. How do you discover the
obscure, as Blanchot would say? It seems to me that I had a kind of amorous relation with
this text, which enabled me to... Barthes' text – which in a way enabled me to crystallize the
research I'd done on a text of Eisenstein – that appeared in Cahiers [du cinéma] a long time
ago and was on this text. So, well...

Deleuze: Can you tell us a little bit about what this text is about… it's a text that has aroused
a great... [Inaudible remarks] it's a greatly felt text… [Inaudible remarks] you can feel it, you
can really feel it.

Carasco: Putting it in these terms makes it sound like we are trying to avoid the issue.

Deleuze: No, no, this is what's missing... [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: And... well, I think it comes down to my affection for a text, Barthes' text, this
affection which is perhaps of an amorous order – in Barthes' sense of the word – of what this
text could provoke, the pleasure of the text. That said, it's a bit of a cop-out to say that. I'm
not sure what you mean when you say “I don't see it”. That is, if you ask me, Show me this
image – the old peasant woman… what this “obtuse meaning” is, well, I'm not sure that it
really falls under the order of seeing. Even what Barthes says, since he says it himself, when
he takes the example of the old woman – we agree that this is what spurred him to write this
essay – it seems to me that what Barthes says… he says that it “cannot be described”. You
need the image. If there isn't an image… if there isn't an image, you can't read the text in this
way, without the image in front of you. It means nothing if there's no image, so it has
something to do with seeing… well, at least in the immediate sense of the word. But he says
afterwards, he says afterwards, he says, finally he says, very well… [inaudible remarks] that
it lies between saying and showing. He says that it is an anaphoric gesture, it's a pure showing
[monstration], which doesn't have… it’s a gesture without a determined meaning. It's a pure
showing that designates not an elsewhere of meaning, but something that is beyond meanings
that have already been catalogued, coded and known.

I don't know how to deal with it, because it seems to me that he himself says that it cannot be
described – I made a mistake earlier – he says that it can't be described, it can only be said.
So it comes down to this: to express the obtuse meaning, one has to write. It falls under what

he calls the text of writing. It comes through writing, through a kind of poetic act of writing
his text. So, then...

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Well, “Drawn mouth, squinting eyes, Kerchief low over her forehead, she weeps”.5
Well, it seems to me that this… this enigma, the unusual aspect too, what ultimately is the
exciting side of what Barthes is saying, is something that in a way he says you can only see
“over the shoulder” – like looking over the shoulder of someone writing – so it's something
between “seeing” – because you need the image, it's a still – and, he says, “showing it” (a
gesture). Perhaps there's an internal relation here with gestus. I'm thinking of these two
fragments of… these two poems, two lines by Hölderlin that say: “Man is a ...”, what’s
normally translated as “sign” – I don't know German at all – “is a sign”, and in fact [Gerard]
Granel in the French translation translates this “sign” as “monster”, in the sense of
monstration [showing].

I think it's the question of the sign that's being raised here, that is, of a sign that is visual, or at
least that begins from the visual, from the visual image and that in a way would be, could we
say, a sign-principle, a pure sign, a sign whose meaning and significance has not yet been
redetermined, and that is perhaps therefore still indeterminate, not yet determined? Well,
when I put it like that, I don't know if it clarifies anything.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks] … that raises another question that we can pursue... It marks a
first difference between us... [Inaudible remarks] I have the feeling that what I understand is
very different from what you understand... [Inaudible remarks]

So, we can move on to the second question: How do you manage to link the two... [Inaudible
remarks] You say that it's not exactly a matter of seeing, it's a seeing-shown, it's as if the eye
is shown something. I agree. But I'd like to ask you a question: Are we supposed to see this in
the course of the film, or are we supposed to stop and wait for the still?

Carasco: Well, excuse me, but Hölderlin 's phrase was important: “Man is a monster deprived
of meaning… is a sign”. But, if you'll forgive me, the etymology would seem more like
monster. So, it's an etymology that refers to people who… [Inaudible remarks] and Granel
gives the etymology [inaudible remarks] as “monster” and not "sign". Well, it's more that it's
deprived of meaning, so it's not a question of meaning.

So, I come back to your question. If, like everyone else, I read Barthes, if I read Barthes
literally, I'm obliged to answer… For Barthes – and you have to hold on to this, I think you
have to hold on to it first, and even not just at first but all the time – all the time you have to
hold on to this literalness of Barthes, meaning you can only see it in the still. In any case,
what's important is that it can only be seen in one still, one still only, and outside the film.
That's what Barthes says, and well, I can't say anything other than what he says, so this is
what he says, well… that's Barthes. At least, I permit myself to see something else.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Sorry?

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Well, he says he saw it in a photo in Cahiers du cinéma, that is, outside the film,
and that when he goes to the cinema, he doesn't see it anymore.

Deleuze: Well, that's different. He saw it in a photo...

Carasco: He saw it in a photo.

Deleuze: ... and not on a still.

Carasco: My hypothesis, my personal feeling, is that if he had a slightly more trained eye,
that is… if he had worked at the editing table, if he were a filmmaker, and if he had worked at
the editing table, still by still, the old woman, well, maybe he'd see her in the film in motion.
And I think that, after reading Barthes, this obtuse meaning is something I’ve seen in films a
few times...

Deleuze: You can see it in the course of the film.

Carasco: That's where I differ from Barthes. That said, I don't think this difference is
essential. It's the third level, in a way… I think that whether we can see it, or when Barthes
doesn't see it, I don't think it changes Barthes's initial assertion, which seems to me to be
related to the question of the still, namely that we can see it simply in a single still and
therefore not between two, or between several… that the obtuse meaning is not a friction or
collision or the serial-movement of two or several...

Deleuze: ... that there is no rupture of relations.

Carasco: So, it seems to me an interesting question because I don't feel that way, the way
Barthes feels. But, at the same time, I say to myself that it doesn't take anything away, it
doesn't in any way restrict the question in Barthes' text on the obtuse, which he defines quite
clearly as within a single still, and not at all as interval, collision, shock. So, it seems to me
that...

Deleuze: So, let's move on to what you think, since you accept, since you say so in a sense...
[Inaudible remarks] So that was the first question, provisionally resolved. Second question:
Do you, then, believe that the word “obtuse” is fundamentally related to… [Inaudible
remarks] Even if you can grasp it in the course of a film, for itself, in itself, does it have a
fundamental relation with… [inaudible remarks]?

Carasco: Well, insofar as I've, let's say, merged the meaning of this text by Barthes [with
Eisenstein] in order to read Eisenstein, that's obviously the way I’ve merged them. That is, it's
not so much the development or analysis of the image that interests me, but it's actually the
entity – I don't know if it's a concept or a category – the entity of the filmic. I don't think it's a
concept, no more than the obtuse meaning. I think it's...

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Yes, well. But it seems to me that the obtuse meaning and the filmic, which would
be the basis of the obtuse meaning… the notion he proposes at the end of the text, almost on
the last page, which is the densest part, this is what interests me, what interests us all. The rest
is the writing, the pleasure of the text, but this is Barthes' own impression, I hold onto that,

yes I hold onto it, the idea that the obtuse meaning and the filmic are fundamentally and
radically linked to the still. That's what I think is important in Barthes’ text, otherwise it’s not
that interesting.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Well, I don't know what I’ve said. But I'll try to say it differently.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: What?

Student: [Brief inaudible question]

Deleuze: Yes, the filmic... [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: In any case, in my view this is... this is the core of Barthes' text. Either we agree that
it’s interesting and says something important for our thinking about cinema, and that's it, or it
doesn't say anything and we have to move on and find something else. But then, it seems
obvious to me that it’s that...

Deleuze: Or nothing!

Carasco: ... that it's that or nothing, yes!

Deleuze: So here we are… [Inaudible remarks] and now we go on, because we have other
questions… [Inaudible remarks] So, for you, what's the difference between the still…
[Inaudible remarks] between the filmic and a photograph, given that Barthes... [Inaudible
remarks – Here Deleuze comments on how Barthes remains deliberately vague on these
distinctions]

Carasco: Well, I'll say right away that I don't know how to answer that, but I do know that it's
the kernel of the question. So, I'll try to say some things that I know, and that I don't think
illuminate the difference, alas, between a still and a photograph. I don't like photography at
all. I'm the opposite of Barthes in this, I detest photos, I don't like photos. Really, I'm not
interested in that, I've never read anything about it.

Deleuze: Me neither, me neither... [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Well, having said that, there's one thing I'd be able to formulate a little – it’s just
banalities but there we are… – it’s that I clearly understand not what a still is, but the
between of two stills in relation to cinema, it's... if I hadn't read Barthes's text, or if I put it out
of my mind, well, if I'm asked a question, if someone says to me: What is cinema for you?
What is the key cinematographic element? I'd say, not only… – I'd be very Eisensteinian in
the end, as always – I'd say that cinema is montage. And what interests me is that for there to
be montage… for there to be montage… for Eisenstein it’s always the out-of-shot – not at all
the off-screen – but ultimately the shock, the collision of: first, an element, second, the
figurative, the visual image, the still if you like, and then, third, what arises, but which is not
of the order of the visible, or the image, or the still and which would perhaps be of the order
of the concept, in any case, a third term. So, if I were asked what is the key cinematographic

element, I'd answer, it's the interval, the interval between two stills. So, it's the interval, well,
but... or it's the out-of-shot… – ah, I think I'm getting somewhere now – it's the out-of-shot as
something included, first of all, in the horizontal succession of stills, like the interval between
two stills, the shock between two stills. So that would be...

Deleuze: You mean between two stills or between two images?

Carasco: Between two images or stills, I'm saying they’re the same thing.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: If I extract a still, as Barthes does, or if I isolate it at the editing table, it seems to me
that cinema begins, or is born, from the shock between shots, well, between images, but at the
elementary level, between two stills. I think it starts there, it's born there. But that's not what
Barthes says.

Deleuze: So, there we have… [Inaudible remarks] for the moment, we have… [Inaudible
remarks]

Carasco: Anyway, I'd like to finish because an idea came to me… what interests me in
Barthes is what he calls the vertical reading within the still. And when he himself takes
Eisenstein's phrase about the counterpoint of audiovisual montage, and says that, in the end,
we can transport what Eisenstein says regarding audiovisual montage, that is, images and
sounds, sound cinema, as early as 1928, in the famous manifesto he wrote with [Vsevolod]
Pudovkin and [Grigory] Alexandrov, when he finally says that what's new is the verticality
that sound introduces, when it falls upon the image in a concept that…

Deleuze: It's not The Manifesto we're talking about?

Carasco: No, that's a text from 1938. But still, there's already this in audiovisual counterpoint,
the idea of a contrapuntal montage. I think Eisenstein used the term...

Deleuze: Ah, yes, in a very different sense, but I think we would agree... [Inaudible remarks
in which Deleuze seems to be summarizing Eisenstein's text known as The Manifesto]

Carasco: And that's what invokes... what invokes... Well, that's what seems central to me.
Because for me, what interests me is Barthes and Eisenstein, the third meaning, the obtuse
meaning and Eisenstein. So, this is the fundamental center of gravity, says Barthes regarding
Eisenstein, in the text on audiovisual montage. I apologize for the confusion, it was my fault,
so I completely withdraw...

Deleuze: Ah, there’s no need…

A student: [Inaudible remarks asking her for the exact reference]

Carasco: It's in Cahiers du Cinéma 222, with reference to 218, the center... the text Barthes
quotes in “The Third Meaning” is by Eisenstein.6

Deleuze: So, it's in Cahiers du cinéma 150...

Carasco: I think it's called “Montage 38”.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: “The basic center of gravity…” – so says Eisenstein of audiovisual montage – “is
transferred inside the fragment… into elements included within the image itself. And the
center of gravity is no longer the element ‘between shots’ – the shock, but the element ‘inside
the shot’ – the accentuation within the fragment”.7 And taking this fragment, this quotation
from Eisenstein, written it seems in 1938, in terms of audiovisual montage, he says: Finally, I
take this fragment and I displace it onto the still, given that there is no sound, and that the
obtuse meaning would fall on the visual image just like the sound and… on the interior of the
fragment, and thus allow a vertical reading, as he says, of the still.

Deleuze: And even the fundamental form of… [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Yes.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks] … not only the fragment, but an interior of the fragment…
[Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: In my view, this is the core of what's interesting about Barthes’ text, his proposal of
a theory of the still, based on the filmic.

Deleuze: So, the still gives us the interior of the fragment...

Carasco: Yes, that’s what interests me.

Deleuze: So, the last question: the interior of the fragment... [inaudible remarks] in the still,
it's beyond the movement-image, and according to you, beyond the time-image...

Carasco: Beyond the movement-image, I think there's no need to… it follows, let's say, from
what Barthes says, beyond or beneath... Well, literally speaking... [Recording interrupted]
[1:00:42]

Part 2

Carasco: Let's say, in terms of the logical, diegetic time of the story, well, that's obvious too.
Is it obvious to you, this first level of time?

Deleuze: Actually, it’s not that important. You see, for me, the problem is... [Inaudible
remarks] something else… sometimes the movement-image, sometimes the time-image, and
there's nothing else... [Inaudible remarks] If I'm told there's something beyond or beneath the
movement-image and the time-image… [Inaudible remarks] So, I would refer them back to
you...

Carasco: I have to say that when I wrote the text we're talking about, that is, the one in the
Revue d'esthétique,8 it was the first year, the very first year… it was during the period when
you were beginning to work on the time-image, sorry, the movement-image, and you were

beginning to distinguish between time-image and movement-image. So, it was, well, that's
why I didn't, I didn't quote you, for example, so as not to talk nonsense, let's say… so as not
to make someone say something they didn't say.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Well, what I'm trying to say is that what I call the time-image is not something that
we covered in the work you did last year. So today, I'd say… I'd probably see things
differently, not only because of this work but, let's say, in the very reading of Barthes' text. I
think I went a bit too fast, or too far. I overstepped the mark.

But there's still something I'd keep, aside from the objective, chronological time-image or the
story, well, logical time, objective time. So, that’s how I saw things, how I saw then... how I
saw it at the time I wrote it, what it corresponded to, the temporality of the film. Well, it's
obvious that objective time, what Eisenstein would eventually call metric editing, the fact that
it's an hour and a half long, that you can measure each shot in seconds and see the relations
between shots – well, the quantitative, objective and measurable level, the metric level of the
film, isn't what's interesting. So, what I called duration – that's why I introduced the term
duration, taking it roughly from Bergson, let’s say… – what I called the duration-image or
the duration of a film or the temporality of a film, I think I could say that it's perhaps, it
would correspond in any case, to what Eisenstein called... [Recording interrupted] [1:04:52]

... objective, metric and so on… it would be something that would probably have to be
centered around the notion of rhythm. It would be a film's own rhythm, its internal rhythm.
So, each time, of this or that particular film. That's what I was talking about, not a duration
internal to a subject, but ultimately a film's own, singular temporality, which would at least
fall under the second level, which is the rhythmic level, and the qualitative level.

Deleuze: Did you mean to say, in fact, that it was beyond rhythm?

Carasco: Yes, because if I take, well, to put it crudely… there are films that you feel have
something to do with time, the films of certain directors… we feel, quite clearly, I don’t
know, the specific temporality of Murnau, for example, or Duras, in all of her films… or even
Welles. These are big examples. Or Resnais. So, it has something to do with what you call
the time-image. But for me, it's the overall time-image of the film that I was talking about.
Okay?

Deleuze: The time-image…?

Carasco: Of the film as a whole, that is the film as a time-image, and therefore the duration of
a film.

Deleuze: The time-image either refers to chronological time... [Inaudible remarks] Well, you
said that there's another time-image which would consist in a non-chronological time and
would relate to the whole film, or a part of the film. And that's what we're talking about…
[Inaudible remarks] So, lastly, the rhythm...

Carasco: The rhythm? This is a time-rhythm, you see… And it's not a metric rhythm, of
course. It's not a mathematical pattern, right? Rhythm is on the side of the time-image.

Deleuze: So, you want this obtuse time to be beyond the movement-image and beyond the
time-image… [Inaudible remarks] is that right?

Richard Pinhas: Before moving on to the next point… I didn't understand the relation
between time, duration and rhythm...

Carasco: It’s not easy.

Pinhas: No... but can you explain the relation between the three? I don't understand.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Pinhas: No, no... okay, forget about that, but speaking about… [Inaudible remarks]

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]… she puts rhythm on the side of non-chronological time.

Pinhas: I get that. But what, what… on the side of non-chronological time, namely pure
duration, pure cinematic duration, a time specific to cinema… what are the relations and what
are the definitions of time, duration and rhythm?

Deleuze: In my view, it doesn’t matter to her.

Pinhas: Really?

Deleuze: It doesn’t matter to Raymonde Carasco, because she's made a… it's a whole other
problem... [Inaudible remarks] that's another problem altogether...

Carasco: No, it does matter to me in the sense – I'm answering, I'm answering you, and I
think we agree on that – it does matter to me. That is, it's obvious that for me, the concept of
rhythm is absolutely fundamental and central to thinking about, let's say, what I call a poetics
of cinema. Because my project isn’t about logic. I'm not trained to construct a logic of
cinema. It's not my job. But what I'm looking for is something more specific. What I'm
working on isn't so new. What I call poetics is perhaps a term that needs to be revised, that is
to say a poiein, how it’s made, how a film is made. So, in terms of poetics, it seems to me that
the concept of rhythm is absolutely central, fundamental, and that we need to think about it.

So, if you ask me, What does cinematic rhythm mean to you? I have to tell you, I don’t
have… I haven't produced a concept of cinematic rhythm, I'm still looking for one, but it's
obviously a very, very strong focus in my questioning, this question of rhythm. So, for me,
it's much more a question than a ready-made concept. Besides, it implies a lot of things, like
analogies with music, poetic rhythm in the ordinary sense of the word, and cinematographic
rhythm, so it's a very complex thing.

Lucien Gouty: You don't think it corresponds to style?

Carasco: Yes, but not entirely. I think the notion of style is insufficient, it's too narrow. Well,
maybe that's another question, I don't know if we should talk about that now.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: That's why I'm answering that it's not at all obvious to me. Rhythm… is obviously
an important question. And it has to be defined and constructed, it's a concept to be
constructed, depending on the filmmaker in question, and there are typologies of rhythms that
need to be defined.

Deleuze: So, let’s go back to... [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Okay. The question I asked myself is... I had asked myself this question, I had
established this distinction based on something that I find useful in Duras – a short text at the
beginning of the introduction to India Song [1975], one of the rare, somewhat theoretical
texts by Duras on cinema – in which she says that in the end, writing a script, a shot
breakdown, is something she does for the technicians… the breakdown, shot by shot, but it's
not... it's not that... I don't need it. I do it to give it to the crew members, the director of
photography, the cameraman and so on...

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks] ... and to the funding commission!

Carasco: [Inaudible remarks] … right, and she says that, ultimately, there is an idea of the
film. Actually, she doesn’t say an idea, she says that there is an overall image of the film, a
mental image of the film, even before she starts writing, even before shooting and so on, and
that's what interested me. And I said to myself that in this mental image of the film – so
should we call it the idea of the film, as Eisenstein says, are they the same thing? I don't know
– but in the mental image of the film, you have a view of the film in its totality before you've
even begun to write a word, and you start writing when you have this view. And then,
precisely to establish… so I would say that it’s a kind of view, and that's what interests me.
So, is this a third level, beneath the movement-image... sorry, the duration-image, if you want
to call it that... is it a third level? Or is it still and continually the duration-image? Well, that's
a question I'd like to ask you. And one that I ask myself too. It's not simply… [inaudible
remarks]

So, obviously, in this sense, is it from this mental image, this view that she herself says is an
open totality? And on this point we agree. She takes the image of a river flowing into the sea,
and then the sea flows into who-knows-where, and that would be the world, so the film as an
open totality... It seems to me that it's from this, from the idea of the film, from the overall
mental vision of the film, perhaps the unconscious idea – I don't know if it's the same thing –
well, from this, it seems to me that this is how the rhythm of a given film unfolds. The fact
that we're going to take, I don't know, a rhythmic alternation of two sequence shots, and then
time-image, and then on the other hand, a briefer, sharper montage of two still shots, for
example, as in the early Resnais films, or the fact that Duras will make her film with such and
such a rhythm, it's in a way completely secondary, and it's already decided, virtually
contained in the idea of the film. What controls the idea, the rhythm of a film, what I call the
rhythm of a film, is also the fact that here we'll do a close-up, and there a long shot. You don't
think: If I do a close-up, I'll also do a long shot. In the idea of the film, everything is already
there. So that's it, that's what seems to me to be the point we should be reflecting on.

Deleuze: No, it's not the same thing. You said it yourself, there's a global image. My question
was: Can we give a positive character to this beyond of the movement-image? In a sense that
you've just defined as non-global, non-globalizable, since, as Barthes says, it's within the
fragment and can only occur in the still, namely the mental image...

Carasco: Ah, no, no, no, not at all...

Deleuze: My question, then, is the obtuse meaning… [Inaudible remarks] beyond the
movement of time, is there still a… [Inaudible remarks] that is, … [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: Or else it's a kind of contracted duration, a contracted duration of the film, from
which the film, and the rhythm of the film, will be able to unfold. Well, then, this is where I
say I'm going back on what I wrote before. I'm now speaking about a contracted time, a
contracted duration, but it's still time and it's still duration. So, how can I think outside of it, if
it's... well, if I call this an initial image of the film, global but initial? What I think now,
rather... and this would be in line with Barthes, because Barthes speaks about reading, you
know, reading the still, and his theory is a theory of the reading of the still. And he says that,
in the end, in this reading, you always have the obvious meaning. The symbolic and obvious
meaning, the communication, is always there, and the obtuse meaning doesn't affect this
meaning at all. And in a way, that's it, these two meanings… they're in a palimpsest relation,
he says, and basically... in a palimpsest, at the level of... one which is real and not textual nor
analogical, like… and it seems that it's a meaning that has to be scraped off. There's a layer,
you scrape away, and then underneath another text appears, a double text. But then there's a
first one you have to scrape off, and the other one is underneath, okay. Whereas Barthes
says...

Deleuze: That's what drove Saussure crazy.

Carasco: Well, Barthes says that the first and second can be inverted, in his still and his
reading of the still. In other words, there aren't two separate meanings, they co-exist, and he
says it's a very twisted arrangement that implies a temporality of signification.

So, I'm about to leave Barthes, and I don't know, maybe I'll say something even more…
[Inaudible remarks] Anyway, I came across a Blanchot text in The Infinite Conversation,
“Speaking is not Seeing” 9, and there's a moment where Blanchot gives a definition of the
image. So he begins with the dream, with the fascination we can have with the image of a
dream, and then, at one point, in a moment of dialogue, he speaks about the image, and says
that there is always a duplicity in the image, and that higher, as he says, further than this
duplicity, there is what he calls the turning point, the torsion – turning in the active sense –
from which the duplicity of the image could unfold. So, I say to myself, if there is a turning
and a torsion that is originary, that would in some way come before the image, before the
duplicity of the image and before language, well… this turning nonetheless involves time.
There can be no turning if there is no time. So that's why I go back on my text. Is it...?

Deleuze: The answer to Barthes' final question is very coherent… [Inaudible remarks] So,
thank you very much. Do you have anything to add?

Carasco: No.

Deleuze: [Inaudible remarks]

Carasco: I hope I haven't been too long or too obscure. What do you think?

Deleuze: No, no, it was very clear... What time is it?

Student: 11:30.

Deleuze: 11:30! But that means it's break time! I think the points Raymonde Carasco made
are very clear. So it's not at all my intention to criticize. I find it very helpful and I needed her
intervention to tell you how I myself see these three problems. I don't see how I can make my
own point of view chime with that of Raymonde Carasco but it doesn't matter, we can
maintain different points of view.

First point of view, I'd say, then, let’s not beat around the bush: What is this business, what
do I retain – Raymonde said very well what she herself retained of this obtuse meaning –
well, what do I... How do I feel about it, in the way Barthes' text expresses the question?
There's one thing that troubles me. I stand by what I said, I stand by it. I still don't understand
it, because, basically, it tells me nothing, whereas other texts by Barthes tell me a lot.

But there's one thing that strikes me. It's in the two main examples he gives – I've already
mentioned them – he tells us: It's very difficult to say what I'd like to tell you, but here it is,
the old lady who proclaims her sorrow in the image or in the special still, you'll remember,
where her bonnet has fallen almost on her eyebrows, where there's the line of the bonnet, the
eyebrows, the mouth, the eyelids, the mouth, in a special organization that forms part of the
series of stills of this weeping woman. Well, there's this one where the obtuse meaning is
embodied, and what does he tell us? He tells us: You see, she looks as though she’s in
disguise. In the others, she doesn't look disguised. In the others, it's just a woman crying. To
translate this, we can say it's an attitude, an attitude, or it's a posture. Her whole body is
engaged in her grief, it's a bodily attitude.

But then, according to Barthes, a still of an image appears that is, for the moment let's say,
unusual, and which will disappear, giving the impression that she is disguised. You
remember, “All these features (the absurdly low kerchief, the old woman, the squinting
eyelids, the fish) have as a vague reference a somewhat low language, the language of a
rather pathetic disguise. United with the noble grief of the obvious meaning” – you see, she
bears a noble grief – “they form a dialogism so tenuous that there is no guarantee of its
intentionality”.10 Very fleeting. You get the impression that she is disguised. And he senses
how dangerous what he's saying is, because he then adds: above all, it's not at all a “parody”.
It's not as if all of a sudden there's a parody of grief, a kind of imitation. It's not a parody. Nor
is it that she doesn't feel. Nor is it that she no longer experiences grief. She feels grief fully,
but we have the bizarre impression that she is disguised, a disguise that perhaps only
profound grief can produce.

The other example, which, as Raymonde Carasco was right to say, is Barthes's essential
example, because the other example he gives us leaves us even more confused… the example
he gives, as I said very quickly last time, is during the coronation of Ivan the Terrible, when
in Ivan the Terrible [1945], there's the coronation scene, a magnificent scene, with the rain of
gold that the two courtiers pour on the head, on the crown, and which trickles down onto Ivan
the Terrible's cloak. He says: Look at the courtiers, here they are. And it's in a text where he
says, I'm going to… I'm going to try to tell you what the third meaning, that is, the obtuse
meaning, is. “I cannot give it a name, but I can clearly see the features – the signifying
accidents of which this heretofore incomplete sign is composed.” – Listen carefully – “There
is a certain density of the courtiers' makeup, in one case thick” – since there are two of them,
here in a still, the makeup of one of the courtiers, thick makeup – “thick and emphatic” – in
the picture of the courtiers – “in the other smooth and distinguished; there is the stupid nose

on one and the delicate line of the eyelids on the other, his dull blond hair, his wan
complexion, the affected smoothness of his hairstyle which suggests a wig, the connection
with chalky skin tints, with rice powder”.11

It's all the more bizarre to tell us this at a ceremony. And he tells us, in the overall ceremony
of the Tsar's coronation, there is one still or a number of stills that are singular. How does he
define them? The characters are not only disguised by virtue of the ceremony – that would be
part of the obvious meaning – they look strangely disguised in another manner. They are
disguised in disguise. They're redisguised on top of the first disguise, that is, on top of the
ceremonial costume. And this too is no parody. And it's very dangerous. He's in the process
of… – and this is what interests me in the text – he's touching on a bizarre notion of mask in
relation to the two courtiers, their faces are a kind of mask.

In the case of the old woman, we also have a face-mask, a mask, a disguise. But what kind of
mask? What kind of disguise? Generally speaking, masking or disguising oneself always
means masking oneself as something else, or disguising oneself with something else. And this
would indeed be the case with the courtiers in relation to the ceremony. They put on their
ceremonial garb, just as the Tsar himself put on his ceremonial clothes. He is disguised as
something other than himself. And when my face becomes a mask, the mask is something
other than the face. So that's what I’d call the “ordinary” situation. But isn't Barthes…
sensitive as he is, isn’t his sensibility drawing out something of a different order? And isn’t
he saying something like: Careful! Sometimes we disguise ourselves as ourselves, or
sometimes we mask ourselves with our selves. I can disguise myself with my own clothes,
my everyday clothes. My face can mask itself with itself without needing to borrow another
face.

And I sometimes have the impression that certain faces become their own mask. When a face
becomes its own mask, it's completely different from when a face dons a mask. When a body
disguises itself as itself, it's a completely different matter. This is not at all the case with a
masked ball. In a masked ball, well, I buy a mask, I buy a costume, and I mask myself, and I
disguise myself as another, as something else, I mask myself as something else. Here, I mask
myself with my own face, I disguise myself with my own clothes. In other words, I mask and
disguise myself as myself, as myself in the sense of “with” myself. My face has become its
own mask. My body has become its own disguise.

Ultimately, this is an incomprehensible notion, or perhaps it refers only to furtive
impressions. For example, I see someone, and I say to myself: What's odd about them today?
And I can't answer because, in a sense, I can only answer one thing: Nothing! There's nothing
odd about them. In other words, there's nothing that isn't them. And yet it's as if their face has
become their mask. Perhaps death has this effect? To speak of cheerful matters, we always
talk about a death mask. If Barthes didn't use this example, I think it's because he detested
death. Because it seems to me that it's death that helps us most to understand this. When
death seizes the body, the face becomes its own mask. Death is what disguises us as
ourselves. The recently deceased body is disguised as itself. The mask of death is the face
itself as it secretes its own mask.

So here I see things differently, and this would be my first difference, with regard to the first
problem we confronted. I would say, if I can give a sense to this expression “obtuse
meaning”, for me it’s that the obtuse meaning would designate the moment when I am neither
myself nor another, that is, when I am neither naked nor disguised, but when my nudity

disguises me as myself, if you understand the “as” correctly. I am disguised as myself, exactly
as I said last time at the end of my lesson, Kerouac, at the end of his life, feeling he was
dying, said: “I'm tired, I'm sick of myself”. I'm the one who’s disguising myself as myself!
I'm the one who's sick of myself. It's this woman's grief that disguises her as a grieving
woman. It's the opposite of an imitation of grief. It's the opposite of a parody of grief. The
courtiers are disguised as themselves, that is, it's their ceremonial costume that induces a
second disguise on top of the disguise constituted by the ceremonial costume. So, I don't see
anything else. I don't see anything else. Therefore, this is very different from what Raymonde
Carasco sees.

But what can I draw from this? I draw something that, for us, may bring us back to our
problem, namely that the obtuse meaning thus defined would indeed constitute a limit. It
would indeed be a limit. But a limit from what to what? It would be the imperceptible
passage, the imperceptible passage from an attitude, grief, to its self-disguise, that is, its
gestus. Or, if you prefer, it would be the imperceptible passage from the everyday attitude to
the… not to the ceremony but to the ceremonialization of the attitude. It would be, in the
words of an American sociologist, “the presentation of self in everyday life”.12

Let's go back to Godard's most basic example. A series of everyday attitudes tend towards a
limit, their theatricalization. This is not at all like a passage from everyday attitude to theater.
It's not a passage from everyday life, from everyday attitude to theater. It's a process of
theatricalization of everyday life. It's a process of theatricalization of everyday attitudes. So
I’m right back at the heart of my problem. We will say that there's a series when a sequence
of attitudes – for example, the attitudes of the grieving woman – tends towards a limit: the
theatricalization or ceremonialization of these attitudes. And the everyday attitudes are
reflected in this limit. And there aren't two terms – the everyday and the ceremonial – there's
a truly vectorized process of passage from one to the other, in other words, a theatricalization
of the everyday attitude, a ceremonialization, a staging of the everyday attitude. So, it's in no
way a parody. I'd just like to state in advance, before we have a short break, the point I’m
trying to make.

It’s this. A limit, a limit is, as you prefer, reached or exceeded. The succession of attitudes,
what Barthes isolates in a still, is the limit in which the preceding succession of everyday
attitudes of the woman overwhelmed by grief is reflected. And what is this limit? It's that
grief disguises her as herself, grief disguises her as herself.

If you follow me a little, I'm getting ahead of myself. But if this were the case, we'd have
made a considerable achievement, namely that, in this process, there would necessarily be a
passage from a before to an after. There would be a passage from a before to an after. I can't
explain this very well yet, but I'd like you to at least have a vague idea. In other words, a limit
is reached or exceeded. There's a before and an after. A limit is reached or exceeded. A
sequence of everyday attitudes reaches or exceeds the limit of theatricalization, of
ceremonialization. From that point on, there's an arrow, a vector. There's a before and an
after. There's a before and an after.

But you'll tell me that this is just a commonplace. Oh, not at all. Not at all. Why not? Because
it's a serial before and after. It's a serial before and after. What does that mean, a serial before
and after? Above all, you mustn’t confuse them with the before and after of chronological
time. It's fantastic what we're doing here, if you follow what I’m saying. Well, kind of

fantastic… I think it's perfect, anyway. We're tearing the before and after out of chronological
time.

There is a before and an after according to chronological time. And what is this? I'd call it the
course of time. The course of time is the determination of the before and after according to
chronological time. But there's also a completely different before and after. It's the before and
after not of the course of time, but of the series of time, and this before and after, this time,
how are they defined? When a sequence is vectorized, that is, when it tends towards a limit,
this is what defines the before and after.

Example: perhaps because it's the most basic example, the staging of everyday life, the
staging of everyday attitudes, in the sense that it gives us this limit. We pass, we pass,
imperceptibly, from the attitudes to the gestus that… what does it do? That connects them?
That connects them, but that connects them afterwards, once it has arisen, to the gestus that
relinks them. There's a serial before and after that mustn’t be confused with the chronological
before and after. I'd say we're already a long way from – we'll get back to it, we've got to
proceed very slowly here... because it would allow us to say something about the time-image
that I hadn’t grasped last year, that I didn't grasp – for the moment, we're just at this point: the
idea of the operation by which we disguise ourselves as ourselves, and in what way this
operation propels us into a kind of vectorized time, of staging, of theatricalization, by which
we move from attitudes to gestus. But we don't pass from attitudes to gestus, without passing
from a before to an after, but a before and an after that pertain to the series of time and no
longer to the course of time. Well, we'll have to... those who don't understand yet shouldn't be
too worried.

I mean, again, I mean, it's not like in [Jean] Renoir, where there is life and there is theater. I
don't mean that in Renoir this is insufficient. I mean that Renoir’s is a completely different
problem. Here, this isn’t the problem at all, it's not a question of life or theater. It's not where
one begins and the other ends. It's not that at all. It's the process of theatricalization that will
relink attitudes once it has been reached. So there's a serial before and after, which is not the
same as the chronological before and after.

You might say, well, let's assume this. Forget this business of the still for the moment, we'll
come back to that. But this is what we need, that's what we need to specify. Where to capture
it? How do we capture it? How do you capture it in cinema? I'm not concerned with the still
at the moment, I'm not concerned with the still yet, I'm not concerned… I've dwelt on the
obvious meaning, the obtuse meaning… obvious meaning, obtuse meaning… I can't go any
further with that. What interests me now is this passage, this serial passage which is not a
chronological passage. How are we going to identify this passage this limit? How are we
going to uncover this passage, or this limit? How are we going to redistribute the before and
after? In other words, how are we going to redistribute the before and after, which once again
amounts to saying: What does it mean to disguise oneself as oneself? [Recording interrupted]
[1:48:03]

Part 3

... Well, I'll tell you what it means to disguise oneself as oneself, or I’ll try to give you a
preliminary answer. To make this as clear as possible, to disguise oneself and oneself means

to fabulate.13 It does not mean to lie. Let's suppose that it means to fabulate, to create a
legend, to be caught in the act. Caught in the act of what… lying? No. Being caught in the
act: this would be the limit, the passage. Being caught in the act of theatricalization, being
caught in the act of ceremonialization, being caught in the act of fabulation. So, this is what
would define the moment before and the moment after. You might ask, is that so important?
Is such a childish example sufficient? Is it really sufficient for us to distinguish a serial before
and after? Well, perhaps it is.

I jump to a filmmaker who has nothing to do with all of this: the great Pierre Perrault, one of
Quebec's finest filmmakers. What does Pierre Perrault say? He makes a kind of cinema that
he calls… he says, I don't like the expression “direct cinema”. We'll see why. We'll see. We
find ourselves thrown back into an almost unexpected type of problem, but we haven’t done
it on purpose. I don't like direct cinema, he says, I prefer to call what I do a “cinema of the
lived”. But how does he define this cinema of the lived? Not as fiction, not as pre-established
fiction. So, what does this mean? He will make a cinema of the lived. He'll take his
Canadians, his Quebecers, and then… But indeed, he began making reportage films. But very
quickly he broke with reportage, no more reportage. And no doubt, right from the start, his
reportages were something other than reportages.14

Why does he break with all fiction? He gives a very simple answer. He says, what interests
me is when... [Recording interrupted] [1:41:00]

... character. Well, this is starting to become clear because it's an odd idea. Our immediate
reaction is, Well, what does it matter? What difference does it make whether the fiction
comes from the character or from the filmmaker himself? And indeed, in a very curious
dialogue that seems at cross purposes – but a dialogue is never entirely at cross purposes –
French filmmaker René Allio and Quebec filmmaker Pierre Perrault talk about their
problems, which they agree form a common problem. And Allio says to Perrault: I don't
know what you mean – you see, he's not the only one… – I don't know what you mean, I
don't see the difference between a fiction that I make as an author and in which I include
authentic characters, and you, who want authentic, real-life characters, but want them to
fictionalize themselves.15

And Allio goes so far as to say, why should a poor Native American's fiction be better than
mine? What interests Perrault is the moment when the Native American begins to make up a
fiction. Whereas Allio replies, If I were to make a fiction, why should it be worse than the
poor Native American’s? Why do you have to take a real character and push him to the point
where he makes up a fiction? – you see, that's the core of the problem we are dealing with
here – And Perrault replies very kindly, but with typical Québécois politeness, You don’t
understand anything, You don’t understand anything. You don't see the difference between
your own fiction and the Native American's fiction, and you don't even see the Native
American's fiction. And Allio says, No, I don't understand, I don't understand.

And Perrault says that when the Native American begins to make up a fiction, it's in the name
of what he calls a “fabulous memory”. You see, fabulation, fabulous, must be taken in the
sense of the fabulation function. It's in the name of a fabulous memory, in other words, it's in
his relation with his own people. Why does the relation with the people involve fiction, this
time, the fiction of the poor Native American? In other words, Perrault develops a function, a
formidable idea: fabulation as a function of the poor, fabulation as a function of the
oppressed, legend as a function of the oppressed.

And this is quite normal, since he's crushed by history. Crushed by history, he unleashes the
fabulation function. What is fabulation? It's an appeal to his people. While the filmmaker's
function, Perrault says, is to make people see the filmmaker's function… by nature, the
filmmaker is cultured. Not that much, in fact... but however little he may be, he is still
cultured. He's a cultivated person. In other words, says Perrault – and here Perrault's words
are splendid – he speaks on behalf of a colonizing people. By nature, the filmmaker speaks on
behalf of a colonizing people. And Perrault says, Even I, a poor Quebecer, if I invent a
fiction, you'll see that the dominant ideas, that is, the ideas of the colonizing people, will
always creep in.

So the filmmaker, even if he's a native of the country, even if he's a Quebecer, has to create –
and this really is creation – by bringing the real characters, the poor, the oppressed, not to
recount their truth, but to create a legend, fabulous memory. Why is this? Because, being
oppressed, they have lost the people. The people have disappeared, the people are missing. To
invent a people who nonetheless exist, says Perrault, to invent a people who nonetheless exist.
This is true for the Palestinians, it’s true for the Kanaks, and today it's also true for
Quebecers.

This people exists, yes, but it exists outside history, it exists outside experience. So where
does it exist? It exists insofar as it has to be invented, both at the same time. How will it be
invented? Through fabulous memory. There is no history here, since history is always that of
the colonizer. Fabulous memory, that is, what becomes essential is that there be no prior
fiction, but that we pass, imperceptibly, from the everyday character’s lived experience of
oppression to the fabulation function. We pass from the poor native American to his fiction
making, to his activity of making fiction, of making a legend, and it's in his activity of
making a legend that the relinkage with the people takes place, the relinking with their people
in a situation where there has never been any prior linking, because theirs was a crushed
people.

If this is what Perrault is saying, he's bringing something very important to our problem. You
see, this passage where we are disguised as ourselves, in the same way, the character will
make a fiction of themselves. They are not part of a prior fiction. Here, I'll read you Perrault's
splendid text, the short exchange between Allio and Perrault. Allio: “Fiction... which consists
in telling stories that one invents, makes just as much sense if it's you who invents or if the
one who invents is a real character in the film” – so, what's the difference? – Perrault doesn't
say yes or no… – “If the Native American tells a legend, he finds himself in a state of making
legends, caught in the act of making up legends. But the legend, proposed as an account of
what happened, does not separate itself from lived experience.”

Under the name “cinema of the lived”, Perrault lays claim to a mixture of lived experience
and fiction. But it's not a question of mixing lived experience and fiction, as if there were
both lived experience and fiction. It's a mix such that, on the contrary, the character will pass
from a vectorization of their lived experience to the fabulation function, their fabulous
memory, through which they invent a relation with their people by finding it again. And here
we have the figure we were discussing before. There's a before and an after, and they meet
again. If the Native American recounts a legend… let’s first imagine them there, without
recounting a legend. Their life drags along. And then, little by little, and this is a very subtle
movement in Perrault's cinema, the characters start recounting legends to each other. There's
a before and an after, we've moved from one element to another. There's been a fictionmaking that's the equivalent of what earlier on I called theatricalization. A series of lived

attitudes is reflected in an act of fiction-making, in a fabulation function. There's a before and
an after, but this before and after are not chronological. They don't refer to the course of time,
they're serial, they refer to a time series.16

A time series has nothing to do with the course of time. The time series is not chronological,
and yet – and this is the pseudo-paradox that is so important to me but that I missed last year
– and yet there's a before and an after, a before and an after of the series, without this before
and after having to be understood chronologically.

Let’s have a break. Let's have a break. So, now I really need, could you be so kind… are
there three people her incapable of lying? You, for example? You can go… you can go for a
coffee… over there, you go for a coffee but at the gallop because we don't have much time.
So run, okay? Run very fast. Go get your coffee. And if the machine is out of order, you don't
stop, you go straight to the secretary’s office. And then if you can be so kind, if Zouzi is
there, you know who Zouzi is, right? Give him… but I need someone else, I'd like someone
else to go with you, yes, if you could be so kind… [Recording interrupted] [2:01:57]

So, the... no it’s not a vacation, the mid-term meditation runs from the 9th to the 25th. That's a
fortnight, two weeks? Okay? From the 9th to the 25th, so this is our last session. So we need to
find a point that’s easy to remember, which is going to be hard. So we're going to shorten this
last session. It's a… what day is the 25th ?

Student: It’s a Monday.

Deleuze: Yes, it's a Monday! Wait… what day is it? Do I read... yes, maybe it's the 27th.
Okay, so if Monday is the 25th, then we’re back on the 26th, the 26th. Okay...

Yes, I insist, because I think it's important, at least it is for me. You see, we're right in the
middle of the first question, aren't we? For the moment, we've completely dropped the whole
thing about the still. But what interests me is this… this kind of cinema that has been badly
defined as direct...

Georges Comtesse: I'd like to ask you a question.

Deleuze: Yes... sorry, we have to close the door.

Comtesse: Based on what Raymonde Carasco said about what in cinema could – but which
wasn't clearly specified – what could be beyond the time-image and the movement-image, I'd
simply like to take something that doesn't necessarily pertain to cinema but which could be
translated, which has perhaps been translated into cinema. I'd simply like to talk about the
greatest defender, the most obstinate defender, or rather, the most relentless guardian of the
order of time, not its mode, its course, but its order of series. I'd like to talk about the
obsessive neurotic, and above all, when the obsessive neurotic… when the fiercest guardian
of the order of time, is traversed by certain events that are literally uncontrollable. For
example, the event of extreme tension, of a conflict that rages within them, of agitation, fever,
disorder, vertigo, vertiginous disorder, that is, this event or this series of events where they
are literally confronted with the most obscure stranger within themselves, when they are
besieged, assaulted, even attacked by the stranger within.

It seems to me that this series of events can no longer, literally, be reinscribed in the order of
time of which they are the defender. If they do this, it will necessarily… they will almost
always do it, but if they do, it will be in a way that literally defines obsessional imposture. If,
within this imposture, they begin to elaborate a philosophical theory of time in order to justify
the order of time, or to find a time, or to imagine that there is a time before the stranger, that
the stranger is a function of time, then it's no longer simply obsessive imposture we're dealing
with. In terms of their philosophical theory, it will be imposture as fabulation. That's all I
have to say.

Deleuze: If I understand correctly, it's for me… I'm the one doing all this. No, it's not me? I
thought I recognized myself!

Comtesse: It's not something that's necessarily assignable. I can talk about people I know,
that's all. That's all there is to it…

Deleuze: Oh, yes!

Comtesse: Far be it from me to maliciously include you in this!

Deleuze: No, no, no, but... in any case, I couldn't be part of that, since I’m not an obsessive
neurotic. And so that puts me out of the category of imposture and imposture as fabulation,
since I’m not an obsessive neurotic. So maybe it's Raymonde... Well, I prefer to take a more
neutral view of what you're saying, the possibility that we could develop, as has been done in
a very interesting way, psychiatric forms of temporality based on all this. But in fact, from
what you're saying, you wouldn't be so much in favor of that. Well, listen, I'm still unsure. I
feel it's better not to... it's better to move on. I take your point but indeed, as you say, you've
got to let it, to let it... okay.

In any case, I think we'll find this problem less at the level of psychiatry than at the level of
politics, when, in the second term, we'll have to deal with the relation between cinema and
politics in relation to thought and you’ll understand the sense in which Pierre Perrault
believes he's making a political film. And in my view, what we're speaking about here is the
fundamental difference between old-style political cinema – not in any pejorative sense of the
term – meaning that of the great Soviet directors, and modern political cinema. Here we have
the whole question of how the relation with the people can only be achieved through
fabulation, through the function of legend-making, since the relation with the people is now
with minority peoples, unlike the situation in so-called classical political cinema. In other
words, it's a way to respond to the question: In what sense has political cinema today moved
to the Third World? Despite the importance to political cinema of three great filmmakers,
who it seems to me are the three greatest European directors – Godard, Resnais and Straub –
it’s clear that...

Student: Who comes first?

Deleuze: Godard! It seems clear to me that the living source of political cinema is indeed in
the Third World, and that it's not by chance because it responds to a new type of relation with
the people, and this is what we're talking about with regard to Pierre Perrault. But I’ll give
you a second example so that... but this time in very different conditions.

I'll take the example we barely mentioned, it seems to me, last year or some other time – or
maybe we didn't speak about it, I don't remember… – the example of Jean Rouch, since he
too is comparable to Perrault.17 In what sense? He, too, rejects the expression “direct
cinema”, though at a certain point, early in his career, he may have made some, just as
Perrault made some reportages. But what's the important thing, in the case of Rouch? You
see, here too we have the moment, or the limit – and once again the moment is a density of
time, it's a real density of time, it's not a moment like an instant, not at all an instant – it's the
moment when a character begins to fabulate. And this is what you recognize in Rouch's great
films, just as you recognize in Perrault's great films, the moment when the Québécois family,
generally in Perrault's work the Tremblays, the Tremblay family that he never stopped
filming, the Tremblays begin to fabulate, or the Native American begins to fabulate. Okay.

What happens in Rouch’s cinema? It's when the African begins to fabulate, when the African
starts to create a legend. And what he manages to capture is exactly… – perhaps this will
make things clearer by dint of repetition – is a sequence of attitudes that will be reflected in a
gestus. The gestus is fabulation, the fabulation function. And it is through the fabulation
function that the Black guy, the African guy will rediscover and reinvent his relations with
his people.

And so, in this respect, although there are obvious differences between Perrault and Rouch,
for me, their conception of cinema is fundamentally… fundamentally the same. And we can
see this right from Rouch's first major films. In Les maîtres fous [The Mad Masters, 1955],
what is he trying to show? In Les maîtres fous, which is the first classic Rouch film, or one of
his first, the point is to show Black people assuming – how shall I put it? – mythical
functions… to be quick, I’ll just use the first terms that come to mind… mythical functions,
sacrificial functions, theogonic functions and so on. But at first, they are shown engaged in
their everyday activities: one is a street sweeper, the other this, the other something else, and
we witness the passage from everyday attitudes to this fabulation, this ceremonialization, this
theatricalization of attitudes that pass into a new element, that is, we move from attitudes to
gestus. The Black man, the African man begins to make fiction. The street sweeper, the sheet
metal worker, the tinsmith, whoever, they all… the postal worker, they all start to make
fiction.

And what Rouch is trying to capture – not at all as an instant, which would be a kind of
privileged instant – is the temporal process, which is no longer a process, and this becomes
obvious, it's not the course of time, since after the ceremony the mad masters will find
themselves once again one as a street sweeper, the other a postal worker, and so on. It's
something quite different, establishing a before and an after which are that of the series of
time and not that of the course of time, that is, everyday attitudes which tend towards their
gestualization, which again becomes attitude only to return to gestualization and so on. And
this is what we have here, attitudes and their corresponding discourse, then new attitudes and
a new discourse that corresponds to them, one reflecting in the other and establishing the
distinction of a before and an after in the series of time, a before and an after that are no
longer chronological. I can't say that, chronologically speaking, the Black man was first a
street sweeper before exercising his function in the mythical mise-en-scène. No, it's not
chronological. It's rather that one is a serial before, the other a serial after, and that it's in the
series of time that the distinction between before and after is made.

Another better-known example – since it's one of Rouch's best-known films – is Moi, un Noir
[1958], where the opposite approach is taken. It's through their fabulations that their real

attitudes are captured. The unemployed man from Abidjan who identifies himself – but
“identify” is the wrong term – who fabulates himself as a federal agent, Lemmy Caution, the
prostitute who fabulates herself as Hollywood actress Dorothy Lamour, the passage, the
return to their real situation as unemployed man and prostitute, the way they themselves
judge the fabulation they're engaged in, and so on. It is this serial passage from before to
after, from after to before, that will constitute the series of time.

In Jaguar [1967], the same thing happens. In Jaguar, the three Black men leave, and as soon
as they leave, they begin to make legends, they distribute the roles, and through a journey,
this time, there's almost a superposition of the two, of everyday attitudes and fabulation, since
at each very ordinary everyday episode of their journey, they set up a fabulation function. For
example, the unforgettable visit of the Black men to the “fetishists”, if you remember, for
those who have seen Jaguar, the crossing of the border, the discovery of money, each time
accompanied by a “making legend”. When does this “making legend” appear? For example,
it already appears orally when the man working in the mine says… when he explains to his
astonished friends, he says, Well, you understand what silver is used for, well… – or perhaps
it’s a gold mine, I don't recall… – we make piles of it – and here the camera shows the piles –
we make piles of it, and then we lock up the piles, that’s what we do, we lock up the piles.

This becomes a kind of formidable activity of fabulation, and then… and then in Jaguar,
there’s also when they invent their little haberdashery business, and you have the everyday
attitude, and then there's the “legend-making”, and what does this legend-making consist in?
The astonishing formula invented by one of the three – sorry, I've obviously forgotten the
unforgettable formula…

Student: [She reminds him of the phrase]

Deleuze: Yes, “Little by little, the bird makes its… bonnet”.18 If he had said, “Little by little,
the bird makes its nest”, it wouldn’t have been interesting. That’s not legend, or rather, it's a
pre-established legend, a ready-made legend. No, he has a stroke of genius: “Little by little,
the bird makes its bonnet”... Well, isn't that odd? Doesn’t it make you laugh? It's very... I've
never been able to hear the phrase “Little by little, the bird makes its bonnet” without being
seized by intense joy!

And finally, if you take Rouch's latest film, and I've only read one review of it, it hasn't been
released in Paris yet, but it looks wonderful, Dionysos [1983], which is Rouch's great
synthesis, where the dimensions of before and after, and the passage from everyday attitude
to legend, is multiplied tenfold through Rouch's unusual use of music, or rather, I'd say it'll be
exactly the same case, but with some differences.

And why is it that Rouch’s films are part of a political cinema and at the same time, as is
often said – and this is something for which Africans have sometimes reproached him – he's
still a product of the colonizers? So, it's not… we can't say that this is African cinema, but
what makes him a political filmmaker? Well, in Perrault's case, everything is simple, or in the
case of African filmmakers, everything is simple. It's all about reinventing a people who
already exist. It's all very simple. It’s their own people. Reinventing my people who already
exist, that's the formula of the “Third World” and it’s the formula of all minorities, of all
minority peoples. And indeed, it has to be reinvented, because although it already exists, it
exists as a crushed, oppressed people. So, reinventing a people who already exist, and the

second formula, that this can only be done through the function of fabulation, through making
legend.

See how it relates to gesture? It's this legend-making, the gest, the gestus. The case of Rouch,
which is more complex, but has its equivalence, is that Rouch obviously feels such a hatred
or contempt or malaise for the civilization he belongs to that for him, it's not a question of
inventing a people that doesn't exist, it's a question of… – not a colonized people that doesn't
yet exist or that already exists but that it would be necessary to reinvent and so on – it's a
question of fleeing the colonizing people of which he is a part. And he can only flee it
through the intercession of Africa, through the intercession of the Black people that he will
film, by filming them in their function of fabulation.

And that's why, contrary to what Allio believes, he can't substitute… he absolutely can't
substitute a fiction, and when our European cinema, cinema that is falsely political, makes a
fiction, even if it's linked to real events, it's not political cinema, it’s doomed from the start.
Because this is a formula that was only valid, that was only valid... before, before the war, it's
a formula that was valid before the war, meaning it's a formula that was particularly valid for
the Soviets at the time of their revolution, when they had every reason to believe that a people
was making its revolution, a people that had not disappeared, it was the birth of a people just
as the Americans filmed the birth of a nation. But insofar as this classical basis of political
cinema has collapsed, it's a completely different matter now. So, here we have this first
schema.

But then, you see, even apart from…. why does Rouch call his cinema cinéma vérité rather
than direct cinema? Because, you see, they have no reason to call it direct cinema. They all
reject the term direct cinema. Maybe they began by making direct cinema but very quickly
they went far beyond it, since what interests them is filming the moment of fabulation that
distributes a before and an after in the series of time. That's not direct cinema at all. I'd call it
a cinema of attitudes and gestus, whereas Perrault calls it a “cinema of the lived”, which is
somehow very ambiguous, and the best formula is obviously Rouch's: cinéma vérité, cinéma
verité, which, once again – as Rouch has said ten times, a hundred times – has never meant
“cinema of truth” since, on the contrary, it has the function of pure fabulation, and so it
means truth of cinema and the truth of cinema consists precisely in this operation we're
analyzing in relation to Rouch.

So, one more step to wrap things up. I don't even need to engage with the special situation of
a political cinema. This is also true for… even in a seemingly fictional cinema, where you
have a plot – and this is what we've seen, what we've seen with… this is what we've seen
with the Nouvelle Vague, and with Godard's series – what happens? You can have the
semblance of a plot. You don't have to begin from the real attitudes of Quebec characters, or
African characters and so on. You can just take characters that maybe have a sense of humor.
You take some characters, with a minimum of plot, for example Godard’s Pierrot le fou, or
the heroine of Une femme est une femme… okay.

But the important thing is that you will carry out your operation, which, in my view, derives
from the misnomer “direct cinema”. Once again, to me, it seems that Godard owes an
immense debt to Rouch. Godard has always said so. So, what do you do? Well, to obtain an
effect similar to what we've just analyzed, you make a cinema of attitudes, which is neither a
cinema of the lived nor an action cinema. You make a cinema of attitudes. And precisely in
order to reveal these as everyday attitudes as those of every day… these are the everyday

attitudes of the Nouvelle Vague. We start with a series of everyday attitudes from the
Nouvelle Vague.

Well, ultimately, we could take any attitude – remember… I'm mixing everything up because
we're running out of time – think of [Yasujiro] Ozu for example. Ozu says: To start a film,
what do I need? To vaguely discern the silhouette of characters engaged in a conversation of
some kind and everything starts from there, a completely everyday conversation of some kind
between their vaguely defined heads… a conversation of some kind and everything starts
from there. So, in the case of taking on everyday attitudes, you have to have an idea first, you
mustn’t try to… they have to impose themselves on you. You don't have a story, or else the
story will arise from the attitudes. It will be born of the attitudes. And then, you make them
tend towards a gest. You vectorize them towards a gest, in other words, towards this disguise
of yourself. Not a disguise that would be something else, but this process of disguising
oneself as oneself or, what amounts to the same thing, the process of fabulation. And in this
way, you obtain your series, your series that passes from attitude to gestus.

In Godard's cinema, this will give us the theatricalization of everyday attitudes in Une femme
est une femme, for example. Or in Pierrot le fou, where there's the passage to the sung poem,
to the stroll/ballad [balade], or to the theater, or to the improvised theater scene. In all of
these, you have exactly the same passage, from the attitude to the resulting mise-en-scène of
the everyday attitude, in other words to the gestus that will relink the attitudes and propel you
into another, another sequence of attitudes.

And so, as we've seen, it's not just Godard who will shape, it seems to me, what defines the
Nouvelle Vague, the post-Nouvelle Vague, that is, a whole cinema that we should and could
now call “the cinema of attitudes and gestus”, and which is transposed onto another plane that
we've just seen in the political cinema of Perrault and Rouch. So, if you like, I think that, to
make things clear – I haven't finished with this point because... but I'll try to finish it. You can
see that it's a point from our first term program, since we'd started on the topic of the cinema
of bodies and attitudes in relation to gestus, and now we're in the process of completing this –
but it's in the context of our first question, and our first question was: In what way do these
images resemble an operation whereby someone disguises themselves as themselves? And
then we extended it in a direction that, it seems to me, is very different from that of Barthes,
by answering: Well, it's the moment when someone is caught in the act of fabulation, or is
caught in the act of legend-making, including the fundamental political dimension of this act.

So that, in fact, I'm thinking… Yes, following the vacation, we'll have to bring some
philosophical texts into dialogue, one by a great author that we hold dear, [Henri] Bergson. In
his final book, The Two Sources of Morality and Religion,19 Bergson gives great importance
to something he discovers and which he is the first to define in this manner, what he calls the
“fabulation function” [fonction fabulatrice].20 So, we'll certainly have to look at the Nouvelle
Vague and the post-Nouvelle Vague period, but also at this fabulation function, and see if
there isn't a fundamental fabulation function in the cinema of this period that would be
completely different from the fabulation function of other… of other types of cinema,
precisely because it would be defined by the passage from attitude to gestus, and that would
be the real fabulation function, or at least the fabulation function in cinema. So, I wish you a
nice working vacation. [End of the session] [2:31:32]

Notes

1
  This text is contained in The Responsibility of Forms (Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1985), “Diderot, Brecht, Eisenstein”, pp. 89-97. However, rather than the phrase "coordination d'attitudes",
Barthes' text contains the sentence: “The work only begins at the painting, when meaning is put into the gesture
and into the coordination of gestures.”
   See “The Third Meaning – Research Notes on Several Eisenstein Stills” in The Responsibility of Forms, pp.
41-62. See also Roland Barthes, Œuvres Complètes, tome III (Paris: Seuil, 2002) pp. 500-01.
  See L’Obvie et l’obtus, note 1, p. 59. The notes are removed from the English translation.
   See Carasco's text “L'image-cinéma qu'aimait Roland Barthes (le goût du filmique)”, Revue d'esthétique, Le
Cinema en l'an 2000, 6 (1984), pp. 71-78.
  This is a haiku in the text “The Third Meaning”. See The Responsibility of Forms, p. 56.
  Barthes' “The Third Meaning” appeared in issue 222 (July 1970). Issue 218 appeared in March 1970.
  This text by Eisenstein, from Cahiers du cinéma 218, is quoted by Barthes in “The Third Meaning”. See The
Responsibility of Forms, p. 61.
  See full reference above.
  See Blanchot, The Infinite Conversation, University of Minnesota Press, pp. 25-32.
   See “The Third Meaning”, p. 48. See also Œuvres Complètes, tome III, p. 492.
   See p. 43, see also Œuvres Complètes, tome III, p. 487.
   See Erving Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, New York: Anchor Books, 1959.
   In The Time-Image, fabulation is translated as “story-telling”. We have chosen to retain the word ‘fabulation’
as it more clearly conveys the idea of inventing stories or making up legends.
   On the cinema of the lived and the story-telling function, see The Time-Image, pp. 150-152.
    See The Time-Image, p. 307, note 31, where Deleuze gives the reference to the interviews between Perrault
and Allio, Écritures de Pierre Perrault: actes du colloque “Gens de parole”, 24-28 mars 1982 (Paris: Edilig,
1983), pp. 54-56.
   On this function, see The Time-Image, p. 320, note 49.
   On this aspect of Rouch, see The Time-Image, pp. 151-154.
    In The Time-Image, Deleuze presents this phrase as follows: “The invention of their little business under a
title which replaces a ready-made formula with a figure capable of making legends: ‘Little by little the bird
makes his bonnet’”. See p. 151.
   See H. Bergson, The Two Sources of Morality and Religion, NY: Doubleday, Anchor Books, 1956.
   The English translation of Bergson’s book expresses this as “myth-making function”. Here too, we have opted
to stay close to the French fabulatrice for the reasons stated above in relation to The Time-Image.