1

Gilles Deleuze

Seminar on Cinema, Truth, and Time: The Falsifier, 1983-1984

Lecture 06, 20 December 1983 (Cinema Course 50)

Transcription: La voix de Deleuze, Zayda Granada, Maëva Pires-Trigo and Julien Jaën
(Part 1), Marine Chollet, Cécile Mousist, and Laëtitia Capitolin (Part 2), and Daniel
Rayburn and Thibault Masset (Part 3); additional revisions to the transcription and time
stamp, Charles J. Stivale

Translation: Billy Dean Goehring

Part 1

… [come] hell or high water, we have to wrap up this first section. That would be nice, but if we
don’t manage to get to the end, we’ll just call it quits. I’ll cover as much as I can as quickly as I
can, so that you get a better idea. I’ll start with two short passages. A small excerpt from
Nietzsche, from the end of a very well-known piece—a few lines from Twilight of the Idols, a
quote I’ve already referenced before: “How the True1 World Finally Became a Fable.” He tells
us a story—much like how, today, I want to tell you some stories. I don’t have time to read you
all of Nietzsche. “How did the true world” —or the truth-world— “become a fable?”2

He tells us a story, one broken into six parts or moments. It’s not bad, not bad. I’ll read the sixth
moment—the final, shining moment. Nietzsche says: “The true world is gone: which world is
left? The illusory one, perhaps?”—question mark—“But no!” He decides to put the rest in
italics: “We got rid of the illusory world along with the true [world]!” [Or “truth world”]. “We
got rid of the illusory world along with the true one!” (Twilight, p. 171)

And then in parentheses – meaning what’s there must be important —he makes a comment we
aren’t meant to understand right away. In parenthesis, he says “noon.” The sixth moment
happens at noon. “Noon; moment of shortest shadow.” Given this sixth moment, then, perhaps
the other five—based on his account of them, we don’t know about the other five, but it doesn’t
really matter, right?—shadows didn’t come up before; but you know, in the end he specifically
tells us it happens at “noon, moment of shortest shadow,” and that means the other five moments
took place when shadows were shrinking; at any rate, it implies a series of shadows. “Noon;
moment of shortest shadow; end of the longest error”—the end of the longest error, the longest
error obviously referring to that of the true world—“End of longest error; high point of
humanity.” Then he switches to Latin: “Incipit Zarathustra”—something like, “Zarathustra enters
the scene / comes on stage.” (Twilight, p. 171) Alright.

The other passage is from just before that, in The Twilight of the Idols; this time, he gives us four
moments rather than six, and once again, it’s the last one that interests me: “To divide the true
world into a …” No, sorry… “To divide the world into a ‘true’ half and an ‘illusory’ one,

                                                                                                      2

whether in the manner of Christianity or in the manner of Kant (an underhanded Christian, at the
end of the day).” (Twilight, p. 170)

When it comes to the word, “underhanded,” you have to understand—first of all, you’d need the
German [hinterlistigen, or “insidious”]—but strictly speaking, Kant isn’t a Christian in disguise,
because he’s famously, openly Christian. Then why does he nevertheless claim that Kant is
hiding it? That’s neither here nor there. “To divide the world into a ‘true’ half and an ‘illusory’
one, whether in the manner of Christianity or in the manner of Kant… is just a sign of
decadence, —it is a symptom of life in decline… The fact that artists have valued appearance
more highly than reality is not an objection to this proposition.” (Twilight, p. 170)

That’s interesting because I could just as well say, without changing anything, that to distinguish
between the true world and the illusory world [Pause] isn’t serious; it’s unhealthy. It’s rather
unhealthy to distinguish between the true world and the illusory world; it’s a sign of “decline,”
[Pause] either way, i.e., whether you believe that the true world is better than the illusory
world—it doesn’t matter what “better” means here—or whether you believe that appearances are
infinitely richer than the true world. It’s the very distinction that is pathological; what’s
unhealthy is the distinction itself.

However – however – Nietzsche says that artists are the ones that value appearances over reality.
You might say that artists privilege appearance at the expense of the real world. To which
Nietzsche responds: “The fact that artists have valued appearance more highly than reality is not
an objection to this proposition.” In other words, the distinction between real and apparent is an
unhealthy distinction. “Because ‘appearance’ [for the artist] here means reality…because
‘appearance’ here means reality once again, only selected, strengthened, corrected.”

Notice that what I’m getting at with both passages amounts to the same thing. Remember that
wonderful quote I mentioned from The Gay Science—“Abolish your venerations”—“Abolish
your venerations, or abolish yourselves!”3 Here he says, abolish the true world. [Pause] But you
can’t abolish the real world without also abolishing the world of appearance.

The second passage: “Artists have valued appearance more highly than reality” – no, obviously
not. The artist evolves in a context where the real world has disappeared, [but] once abolished,
the world of appearances is also abolished. They’re perfectly suited for this unfamiliar territory,
we aren’t acquainted with it yet – this sort of desert that results from this twofold destruction:
both the real world and the world of appearance. [Pause]

And so, then, based on these two snippets, I’d like for us to try to put together a story of our own,
based on what we’ve covered, we… Ultimately, the authors I’ve discussed thus far have all told
a specific story, one which Nietzsche characterizes as “how the true world became a fable.”
That’s what I’d like us to do on our own, with our own segmented account. And our multi-part
story comes down to a confrontation… I wouldn’t call it the story of “how the true world became
a fable,” but I’d argue, from what we’ve seen, that it gets at the same thing: how the organic
form of what’s true comes head-to-head with the powers of the false. It turns out to be a rather
intriguing, exhilarating story. So, we shouldn’t skip any chapters, any of its parts—how the
organic true world comes head-to-head with the powers of the false. What ends up happening?

                                                                                                     3

There are a few options: either a Nietzsche remake, or an English or American novel with
headings and chapters, or a stage-play (where we’d need to divvy up roles). Let’s go through the
different roles, then.

What I’d like is for them to span five stages, recounting in sequence—the straight-shooter, or the
truthful man,4 as the first stage; then the original character5 as the second stage; then the third
stage would be the ordinary character; then odd characters for the fourth stage; and then last, and
least, is the new character. Those are the fellows that make up our little puppet show. Is it a
puppet show about us? No, not necessarily. Because with all this puppetry we get Plato and what
happened with Platonism; [Pause] we get Nietzsche, both in relation to Plato and on his own; we
get Herman Melville.

Why is that? Because in what we’ve seen thus far, these authors aren’t very similar. So, the
pitfall for today’s discussion is—it would obviously be a colossal mistake to come away
thinking, eh, Plato and Melville basically say the same thing. That’s not the point. The point is
for us to take what we need from each of them without confusing them, since all three do have at
least one thing in common. What they have in common is that they all, in one way or another,
experienced and sought after this confrontation between the form of what’s true and the power of
the what’s false.

And that’s what’s fundamental—it’s an unexpected development in Plato—but it’s
fundamentally what’s at issue for Nietzsche and Melville, who are nevertheless quite different.
What they share in common is their striving for a certain kind of book, something like the book
of truth, even if that book turns out to be a book of falsity and of falsity’s powers. [Pause] Both
authors know it. I stress that it’s constant in Melville’s work, especially in one of his major
novels, Pierre; or, The Ambiguities [1852], which keeps circling around the question: is there
such a thing as a book of truth, and what would such a book be? It’s no exaggeration to say that
Thus spoke Zarathustra poses the same question. Right. So, we’ll try—all I’m suggesting is that
you approach—not that you do a ton of reading, certainly—but that you really approach this as a
story, with characters. More than anything, it’s important that we not get our characters mixed
up. What I claim is that everything comes back to the story of the truthful man. [Pause]

And the story of the truthful man is Plato’s story, and just as Plato’s story is recounted and
revisited by Nietzsche, at the same time it’s the story we get from some of [Pause] Melville’s
bizarre characters. [Pause] And [Plato] starts off saying something rather simple; to understand
what a truthful man is for Plato, it’s first and foremost someone who claims that “there is a true
world.” But we touched on that last time. The truthful man introduces himself by saying, “I
presuppose a true world.” And what is the true world, according to Plato? It’s what Plato also
calls the world of Ideas, “Ideas” with a capital I.

What can I say about Ideas? I won’t get too far into it because that’s not what I’m focusing on.
Let’s say that Ideas are like eternal forms. How are these eternal forms defined? Eternal forms,
supra-organic forms. They’re forms—like in a novel—marble-like forms, marble, time-defying
forms. Why do I say that? Because at the beginning of Pierre; or, The Ambiguities, Melville
describes a world of marble forms, starting with that of the father, Pierre’s father depicted in

                                                                                                     4

marble. Plato’s father was Parmenides; he, too, was frozen in marble, having claimed that “Being
is – Non-being is not.” Anyway.

What makes these forms supra-organic? It isn’t hard to imagine. You know what Plato is calling
an Idea, it’s exciting, not hard, [it’s] the real world. Something that only is what it is—that’s an
Idea; that’s what Ideas are. That doesn’t seem like much, [but] there’s no need—there’s no need
to wear yourself out trying to figure it out. That’s it! Let’s take the example of the small. The
small. I say, “Aw, he’s so small, the poor thing; he’s so little.” Only it’s odd—Pierre is very
small. He’s small… but he’s also big; he isn’t just small. You can always find something that
makes him bigger by comparison. Then I would say that Pierre is always something other than
what he is. If I say that the number three is a small number—sure, but it’s big compared to
number one, [so] it’s also a big number.

Let’s think about it. Imagine something small which would only be small, no matter the
comparison and in all regards. A small that is nothing but small in all respects—that’s what Plato
calls the Idea of small. Well, that’s wonderful, but you can sense the Sophists coming along:
Hold on, Socrates! That won’t do! There is no such thing! But Plato isn’t worried about that at
the moment. So, there will be as many Ideas as there are things which only are what they are. If
there is a large which is only large and nothing but large, we can talk about the Idea of largeness.
It would be the Idea of Largeness. [Pause]

And some of the things Plato—Socrates—goes over are rather strange, like the Idea of beds, b-ed; we’ll have to go back over it in a second. Well, alright, how could a bed be an Idea? Reading
philosophy is always complicated. Just when we think he’s only talking abstractly, he brings up
the Idea of beds. The Idea of beds—what could the Idea of a bed be? Not even the concept of a
bed. The concept of a bed is the mental picture we have of beds, the mental notion of it. But the
Idea—with a capital I—the Idea of a bed? What sort of nonsense… For Plato, it’s quite simple—
for Socrates, it’s quite simple: the Idea of a bed is a bed which is nothing other than a bed. What
does that mean? Out in the world—in the world we live in—you never run into pure beds. Any
bed we can find is always something other than a bed. For example, it’s wood [Pause] or metal.
But we’ve never seen a bed which is nothing other than a bed. That requires your third eye; it
requires your mind’s eye.

Is there an idea… in a wonderful, well-known passage, Socrates asks: Is there an Idea of hair? Is
there an Idea of mud? There is an Idea for anything where we can say it only is what it is. So
along with mud and hair, let’s take another example… Is there an idea of mother—m-o-t-h-e-r?
It isn’t difficult: is there a mother who is only a mother, that is, who isn’t the daughter of another
mother? If you form the concept of a mother who isn’t another mother’s daughter, a mother who
is only a mother, you could say that she is a mother as such. In other words, she is the Idea.
[Pause]

So, all I’m getting at, then, is in what sense the truthful man invokes a true world qua world of
forms, of marble forms, i.e., where things are what they are and nothing besides what they are.
[Pause] Be definition, it would be a world without perspective. [Pause] It would be a world
lacking any point of view, since anything which is something other than what it is—for example,
something small is large from another point of view—I mean, there are only points of view and

                                                                                                     5

perspectives with things that only are what they are, in other words, things that are beyond
perspective, which lack any perspective. The Idea is that which exists without perspective.

You can see why it will be difficult to determine whether there can be any relationships between
these Ideas. Assuming there are Ideas, what relationships can be drawn between them—it will be
a very special sort of relationship, [where] such a relationship would itself be an Idea, and not a
perspective. And so Plato is confronted with a fundamental question of dialectics, dialectics
meaning the forging of relationships between Ideas. But that’s not what interests me. What I care
about is that you all see how these supra-organic Ideas define—for the time being—how they
define what’s true. [Pause] Yeah, that’s the marble truth. The truthful man is cast in marble.

Second point: what is our world made of, then? What is our world made of? It’s not complicated.
Our world isn’t made up of Ideas; I’ve never seen an Idea. Every mother you meet was
someone’s daughter. You can talk about them as daughters who point back to other mothers;
we’ve yet to find a mother who… even the Virgin Mother… the Virgin Mother is an edge case. I
mean, in Christian Platonism, for Platonic Christianity, the Virgin Mother would be a problem
because she herself has a mother. But on the other hand, there wasn’t only… She is the only one
exempt from original sin, the sin of reproduction itself. She had a mother; she is the daughter of a
mother, but on the other hand, as the mother of Christ, she is removed from reproduction. Maybe
the Virgin Mother gets us a step closer to the Idea of Mother. But these are such great mysteries
that we dare not venture any further.

Then what is our world made of? Plato’s answer comes down like a knife: it is made of
“appearances,” assuming we understand what he means by “appearance.” By no means does it
refer to that which isn’t real; it refers to that which isn’t true. Which is what we’ve seen: the true
is reserved for the world of Ideas. What is our world made of? Well, let’s cut to the chase: it’s
made of “copies.” What we call real objects are copies of Ideas. Ideas are marble models—we’re
making a little progress, summarizing what we’ve done the last few times—Ideas are supraorganic models constituting the true world. Our world is made of copies, and these copies are
absolutely real things. It’s the reality of our world; the copies are organic realities that
reproduce—at a lower level—that reproduce Ideas. They are organic realities. [Pause]

Why “organic”? Why “organic”? Well, because unlike Ideas, which are eternal, they necessarily
imply “production.” They are produced. And where does this production take place? This
production takes place in nature, nature defined as… what the Greeks called physis—whence we
get the word, “physics”—physis is the realm of production. But in one sense, human production
[Pause] counts just as much as so-called natural production. A bed is a copy; a bed is an organic
reality, if we define organic reality as an appearance, insofar as it refers to a process of
production or manufacture. Our world is a world of copies both in terms of artificial, man-made
objects and in terms of organic, naturally produced realities. Thus, all of it is comprised of
organic realities. Then, in a Greek way, I could just as well talk about a bed’s organic reality as I
could an animal’s organic reality—we’ll use “organic reality” to refer to everything produced,
modeled after an Idea, modeled after a supra-organic idea, whether it’s produced by humans or
by nature. [Interruption of the recording] [29:14]

                                                                                                     6

… “copy” points to a thing’s resemblance to an Idea. “Copy” doesn’t refer to an extrinsic
resemblance; “copy” represents or designates an intrinsic resemblance. [Pause]

It’s worth noting that this world of copies, or of organic realities, is where perspective comes
about. For all of this world’s realities, be they artificial or natural, are subject to the law of
perspective. They are appearances or apparitions, even though they are perfectly real—you see,
they are appearances or apparitions so far as truth is concerned, but they are perfectly real when
it comes to their consistency, depending on their internal resemblance. From there we get
perspectives, points of view.

What makes it point of view? A carpenter makes a table. What difference is there between the
table and the Idea of the table? A carpenter doesn’t need to look over their neighbor’s shoulder to
make a good table. Otherwise that would go on ad infinitum, and we would get stuck in a loop.
The carpenter does copy, but their model is the Idea; they copy the Idea of a table. What is the
difference between a model and a copy? The Idea of a table has no perspective. It is a table
which is nothing other than a table. To construct a table, the carpenter must make a table which
is also something other than a table. Namely, it is wooden—it isn’t only a table. It is a wooden
table, right. [Pause] To construct something small, I’d say… to copy the Idea of the small, I must
construct something small, but something which is small compared to me. And the table built by
the carpenter, if he’s done a good job of copying its Idea, if he clings to the Idea—it will be a
table according to a set of perspectives. [Pause] A thing which is never what it is alone is
precisely characterized by the multiplicity of perspectives on it. [Pause]

Then we come upon something other than manufacturing. Manufacturing, producing, is giving
birth to an always perspectivist copy of a model, the ideal model; suddenly another side appears:
the copy’s resemblance to its model needs to be evaluated. There are more and less perfect beds,
and so on. Who’s to judge? Plato invariably answers—and this is one of the most interesting
aspects of Platonism for me—invariably he says, it isn’t the builder, the producer isn’t who
judges their product; it’s the user—an example brilliantly laid out by Socrates. The judge of a
good flute, i.e., whether it resembles the pure Idea of a flute—what is the pure Idea of a flute?
No doubt it would be the absolutely pure sound that copies—it would have an audio model—
copies or attempts to incarnate the entire series of flutes produced by flute-makers. But who
decides whether a copy resembles its model? It isn’t the flute-maker; it is the flutist, the user.
Who judges whether a bed resembles the Idea of a bed? It is the user, the one lying down; it isn’t
the carpenter.

Well, crucially, you see, suffice it to say that there is a double movement. One movement is
production, whereby the model is somehow passed onto the copy. The other movement is use,
whereby the copy is tied to its model. The truthful man is someone who constantly refers copies
back to their models. [Pause] Someone who is truthful, who is a truthful man, is someone who,
as Socrates keeps saying, “knows how to use what they produce.”6 Real science is the science of
use. [Pause] Perhaps, if you manage, manage to understand what philos, friend, means—the
philos, or friend, is the user. [Pause] It’s someone familiar with [something’s] use. [Pause] And
a philosopher is someone who constantly refers copies back to their models. [Pause] And it’s in
this sense that we can call them “truthful,” whereby they can say, “I, being truthful, am nothing

                                                                                                     7

without the true world; I assume that the world is true.” The philosopher is an organic being that
constantly refers back to supra-organic models.

Does that make sense? Maybe you think these stories aren’t all that funny. Just you wait; it’s a
little novel. Everything would be fine—I’m hurrying, right—well, everything would be good and
we’d be done if—if what? If it weren’t for—if massive scandal didn’t show up, a terrible
scandal. There would be the truthful men and their true world, one under the other, the truthful
men beneath the true world, the truthful men themselves an organic copy of a supra-organic
model—all well and good so long as there is nothing in nature other than copies. [Pause] There
aren’t only organic realities in nature—notice we’re coming to our theme from the start of the
year—in nature itself, there aren’t organic realities alone, and that’s troubling. What then? What
could have happened? Well. We get this development in The Sophist, The Sophist being a
particularly important dialogue.

It is in The Sophist where we learn that organic realities aren’t the only thing there is. What else
is there? There aren’t only real and produced things; [Pause] there’s an entire realm of shadows
and reflections. [Pause] And what is the status of these shadows and reflections? What exactly is
it that, in our world, compromises organic reality—note that this isn’t far off from our argument,
but now we sort of have Plato’s seal of approval, which we weren’t even counting on—When we
went out of our way before to say that, curiously, there are organic descriptions [on the one
hand] and then something else [on the other]; there are organic forms, and then there are
crystalline formations. Along comes Plato with his world of shadows and reflections, reflections
in shadows, shadows cast by fire after nightfall—which are not organic realities. Thus, see, he’s
able to claim that there is something in our world, in our world of copies. Then, you think, well,
that’s easy: these are simply degraded copies! Copies of copies! Yeah, look, three beds; I have
three beds. I have a Bed-Idea, a bed-copy made by a carpenter, and a bed-shadow or reflection.
Right.

At the same time, can I just say that they’re copies of copies? I only find these extremely bizarre
crystalline appearances accompanying my organic realities. Especially since—it gets
complicated because organic realities point back to the judgment of the truthful men, who are
themselves organic insofar as they refer organic realities back to their models. Who is
responsible for reflections? Who is responsible for shadows? [Pause] What a story! [Pause] The
truthful man will say yes, of course! The truthful man is eager to say, “Even reflections, even
shadows—I’ll take it upon myself to hold them up against their marble forms.” But shadows and
reflections have a habit of escaping, gravitating toward another figure, a kind of jester [Pause]
whom Socrates dismisses out of hand, someone who’ll have been there the whole time in Plato’s
work—the Sophist! Well, well, well…

But then the Sophist is a fraud or falsifier.7 [Pause] No, they say, shadows and reflections are
not copies of copies. Shadows and reflections have a life of their own, an inorganic life, [Pause]
and they go out of their way to ask—what is the model for a dancing shadow, or a rippling
reflection in the water? You could argue that the model is the organic reality poised over and
above the water, or the organic reality moving behind the fire. You might say that, sure,
maybe…To that, as Nietzsche might say, the Sophist laughs. Why? Because the Sophist knows
that there are things other than copies. [Pause]

                                                                                                      8

Plato has a name for copies in The Sophist; he calls them “Icons.” [Pause] The Icon, then, is an
organic reality insofar as it is modeled after an Idea. [Pause] But there is something else. [Pause]
There are copies which are marked by falsity, Socrates says, by a fundamental falsity. What?
[Pause] There are formations whose resemblance depends on their inaccuracy. In other words,
they are no longer copies of copies; they are fake copies. That already sounds like something
other than a copy. Their resemblance depends on their inaccuracy. And he offers an example
himself in The Sophist. He points to these buildings with huge dimensions—they’d have to be
big—where inaccuracy is necessary. Why? Because the spectator’s point of view is contained
within the building itself, included within—look it up in the text—oddly, some things include
their perspective.

These seem to be phenomena with internal perspectives—for example, his example refers to an
immense temple, a column. He says: with a huge column, you are forced to make the top larger
than the base, because otherwise it will feel like the column is not even, that its diameter isn’t
constant—it will feel like the top part is smaller. So, you have to make it larger in order to
compensate for the distance. It’s a rather straightforward case of something with internal
perspective, something that accounts for its own perspective. If I look at a painting depicting a
table—Heidegger has a great bit of commentary on Plato in this regard—he says, sure, the
painting presents me with a table, right, it cannot help but depict the table for us from a certain
vantage point. [Pause] The painting’s table contains a perspective. It includes the perspective, it
includes a point of view. You might think—Ah, what about cubism! Well… I don’t think
[cubism] would have worried Plato all that much. By no means is it the case that cubism denies
perspective. [Pause]

Then how is that different from organic realities? We saw that organic realities were subject to
the law of perspective. Perspective is born out of organic reality. But the carpenter’s table? Of
course I, a user, a philosopher, can only see it from one vantage point, from one angle or another,
but those are all instances of extrinsic perspectives. I was only able to perceive it from one angle
or another, but I knew how to use it. In terms of my perception, I perceive it from this angle or
that, but as a philosopher, I know how to use it—no matter the angle. I’m able to home in on a
thing’s identity from just about any perspective.

Whereas here in this other domain, where I find myself confronted with systems embedded
within perspective, where I’m faced with intrinsic perspectives, perspectives inside of the
system, I find something quite different. [Pause] I can no longer even say… I would say that
they’re fundamentally distorted [faussées], but distorted compared to what? To themselves! It’s
not about their being distortions or fake versions of the real deal, or their being downgraded
copies. I can’t even say that much anymore. They are inherently distorted by the perspective they
harbor within.

I’ll go over that again: [Pause] On the one hand he distinguishes—at one point in The Sophist—
Plato distinguishes between organic realities, which are copies of what’s true [Pause] and
crystalline apparitions—“crystalline” in a very broad sense; it isn’t the word he uses,
unfortunately, maybe because it’s fallen out of favor, you know, in these kinds of stories—
anyway, these are reflections and copies… [Pause] On the other hand, at another point, he

                                                                                                   9

distinguishes… [Deleuze corrects the end of his previous sentence] uh, reflections… What did I
say? … [these are] shadows and reflections. And at another point, he distinguishes between
icons, which are genuine copies, and these distorted [faussées] things characterized by the fact
that they contain their own perspective, [Pause] which he calls—as opposed to icons, since icons
are copies, organic realities—he calls them “phantasms.”

See, at this point, we can tell what’s going on right away. The true world and the truthful man are
undermined [Pause] by phantasms, that is, by distortions and frauds or falsifiers. If you will, you
end up with opposed—if I pair them up as opposites—first, organic and crystalline realities /
shadows and reflections—that’s our first doublet, our first pair—second, icons / phantasms;
third, the truthful man, who presupposes and points back to the true world / the fraud or falsifier,
referring to distortions, i.e., things that contain their own perspective.

And that’s terrible! Because, I’m paraphrasing—wow, I’ve already gotten side-tracked, I’ll make
it quick—because what will come of this? You can already guess: tragedy. It will be a tragedy, a
tragedy because the fraud or falsifier and their distortions will undermine the true world from
within, to the point where [Pause] we can no longer tell which ones are bad copies! It only we
could… but no! What they’ve done is cancel out or problematize the very distinction between
model and copy. That’s the fraud’s doing. The fraud or falsifier isn’t someone who makes
copies; there’s still something honest about someone who makes copies. [Pause] They’re still
truthful men, in a sense, but a fraud brings both model and copy into question.

Bringing it back to Nietzsche: “We got rid of the illusory world along with the true one.”8 To
what end? For the sake of what now seems like a monstrous falsifier and their distortions.
[Pause] In other words, again, the issue isn’t about bad copies. The point is that there are no
more models, no more copies. The ground has crumbled beneath us, such that it’s the other way
around: the truthful world… [Deleuze corrects himself] truthful man’s existence depended on
their saying: I assume, I presuppose that there is a true world. And now, it’s the true world whose
existence depends on the truthful man. And truthful man collapses under the falsifier’s assault.
Where are your models now? The falsifier laughs. They ask the truthful man: What are you
going to do? Your models are gone! If there are no models, there are no copies! What’s left
when there are no more models or copies? Me! In other words, what remains is the fraud or
falsifier and their distortions, distorted inasmuch as they contain their own perspective. We have
gone from perspectives on what’s true, from the truthful man’s perspective—which permitted the
thing’s integrity to subsist—to internal perspective, operating within things and permitting
neither model nor copy. The tragedy of the truthful man —the marble statues begin to crumble.

I sound like Nietzsche there, but it would take someone as brilliant as Nietzsche: no more marble
statues, the statues crumble away. See Book I of Herman Melville’s Pierre; or The Ambiguities,
how Pierre reflects on the crumbling stone figures [of Palmyra]. And, of all the great writers that
have come up, if anyone has written forty pages on the development of the truthful man —a
brilliant account out of a famous book by Herman Melville; the book is called Bartleby.9 And
Bartleby—given my accent, I’d better spell it out, b-a-r-t-l-e-b-y, one word; it’s a name,
Bartleby—and it’s such a wild story that words fail to describe it. Apologies for the platitude, but
it’s true. I think you’d be hard pressed to say whether it was written by Melville, or Kafka, or

                                                                                                  10

Beckett. That’s the sort of company it keeps. So, what happens in the story? I can’t help but…I’ll
summarize Bartleby for those who haven’t read it.

It’s about a lawyer with three copyists in his employ—notice, three copyists—I’m not interested
in offering you an interpretation; there are countless interpretations. I’m pointing out why
Bartleby is relevant to what we’re doing right now, today. I’m not offering an interpretation that
I think is better than any other—Bartleby acts like… he’s one of the three copyists; no one
knows where he’s from. Unlike the others, he never leaves the office. He simply does his
copying, without saying a word. He doesn’t say anything. He makes copies and is rather good at
it. And our lawyer is a benevolent man; indeed, he is a friend—the lawyer is a friend of truth; he
is an honest man, a friend, a friend to both people and to truth. He’s a philosopher, then. Still,
Bartleby presents a problem. Everything’s going well, Bartleby is copying, so he thinks, well,
since Bartleby is copying, doing his job, I have no right to bother him. He has him work behind a
kind of screen because Bartleby doesn’t like to be interrupted while making his copies; he
mustn’t be disturbed. Grumbling, he can hear muttering from behind the screen. No worries,
that’s still fine.

And then one day—one day, the lawyer says, “Bartleby, come help us compare.” Oddly enough,
up to that point he had always gotten out of comparing. What does the lawyer mean by
comparing? He means comparing a copy to its original document… [Interruption of the
recording] [1:01:27]

Part 2

… and the lawyer explains how the process works: he has the original and the—what are they
called, well, the, uh, the employees—the copyists have their copies, and they all read through
them, in order to proofread them. The organic reality of the copy must be referred back against
its model.

So now, since there are three copies, for once—before there were only two copies—before there
were two, but now there are three—so the lawyer says, “Bartleby, come over and help us
compare.” From behind the screen, comes an extraordinary statement—whose French translation
directly corresponds to the American text—“I would prefer not to.” [Laughter] And the lawyer,
the philosopher, thinks he’s misheard: “What now? Bartleby, you heard what I said; come here.”
“I would prefer not to.” “What do you mean you would prefer not to?”

And at the time, the lawyer thinks, Oh, Bartleby is just in a mood. Let’s leave him be, since
something’s really got… Anyway. It happens again. One day Bartleby is expected to run an
errand, but no, the cycle repeats, and the lawyer starts to get used to it. Bartleby is a very good
copyist, he does his copying, but he doesn’t want to compare his copies; he doesn’t want to
verify his copy’s internal resemblance to its model. Strange, isn’t it? Then the lawyer tells him,
“Do the rounds while we compare our work.” And we hear, “I would prefer not to.” The lawyer
shrugs and thinks, if he prefers not to, he prefers not to. Bizarrely, everyone starts expressing
themselves in the terms, “I prefer” or “I prefer not to.” [Laughter] The lawyer is beside himself,
then, when the others say, “Oh, I prefer not to have lunch now.” [Laughter] Everyone talks like
that. Bartleby is causing things to unravel. Then one day, something awful happens: Bartleby

                                                                                                       11

settles in behind his screen and no longer copies. An hour goes by, and the lawyer asks,
“Bartleby, what are you doing? You’re not copying!” And in response: “I would prefer not to.”

Well, the lawyer doesn’t dare kick Bartleby out since he’s come to learn that Bartleby has been
living in the office—he never leaves, not even to eat, he sleeps in the office, the only thing he
eats are ginger-nuts, he’s living in the office, right—horrified, as a truthful man, the only way the
lawyer can get rid of Bartleby is to move offices. Bartleby stays put and the new owner has him
kicked out by the police. See how this story is relevant; he gets kicked out by the police. He stays
on the steps where they put him, they put him there; they don’t know what to do with him. They
put him in debtor’s prison, in debtor’s prison, but he has a special status, particularly because the
lawyer is paying for him to be well taken care of. He’s always standing, like this, a marble form.
And then he lies down and dies; he’s dead. What’s going on here? He’s the pure form of a
copyist. It’s the story of the straight-shooter or truthful man, from start to finish. Bartleby covers
every stage of the truthful man. First the lawyer, [then] comparing qua the copy-model
relationship, [Pause] finally, the self-destructing copy, and then there are no more copies. And
what is the copyist?

Obviously, we can only understand it by comparing this sort of protagonist to some of Melville’s
other characters, who might give us a hint. At the very least, we can say that Bartleby possesses a
truly fantastic power of the false that prevents us from mistaking falsity’s power for being evil.
That’s an important point. Second, then, we can say that it’s over, it’s settled, truthful men are no
more. Truthful men died along with Bartleby. The death of the truthful man—and it’s not me,
it’s Nietzsche who’s laughing; he thinks it’s funny—I’ve lost my papers, but it’s in another text,
I think. No? Ah, yes—the “pandemonium of all free spirits.” Yeah. Nietzsche writes: “The true
world (the truth-world) – an idea that is of no further use, not even as an obligation, – now an
obsolete, superfluous idea, consequently a refuted idea: let’s get rid of it! (Bright day; breakfast;
return of bon sens and cheerfulness; Plato blushes in shame,” [Deleuze repeats] “Plato blushes in
shame; pandemonium of all free spirits.”

The second stage: the original character [l’homme original]. [Pause] What is an original
character? He’s nobility, [Pause] someone directly descendant from the gods. [Pause] There
aren’t many original characters. [Pause] He has a strange nobility; he lacks the truthful man’s
modesty. He is truly original. Why call him an “original character”? [Pause] It’s because
Melville devotes a few incredible passages in part of one of his other books, The Confidence
Man, to three types of characters, what he calls original characters, odd characters [hommes
remarquables], and common characters [hommes ordinaires].10 He says, right, at the end of the
day, it’s not hard to be odd. You can do it. But it’s difficult to be original, to reach that point—at
most, there’s only one per novel, [and only] when it’s a really great novel. There might only be
one. You might have a lot of odd characters, but you can’t have two original characters together.
He has highlighted something about original characters, then. He says that, honestly, because
[original characters] tend to refract, to reflect people around them, other people reflect the
original character. That’s why there cannot be two in one novel.

And I argue that, [Pause] there has been one original character in the history of philosophy. If
it’s true that Plato is our truthful man or straight-shooter, there has been one original character.
This original character came before Plato and was among the Pre-Socratics, coming from a

                                                                                                   12

divine family—an agonal family, as the Greeks say—in other words, he descended from gods,
not from humans but from gods. This divine descendent was the great philosopher—but we can
drop the “philosopher”—Empedocles. [Pause] And clearly, any philosophy—and here we’ll
make more sense of what I muddled through last time, all this business with concepts, affects,
and percepts in philosophy—ultimately, what I was getting at was this, that, uh… When you read
philosophy as something dead, you might as well not read it. It ought to be read like anything
else, a great novel, a great poem, a great comedy, a great… because ultimately, there are three
ways to read philosophy, three readings that coexist, as I see it, and you have to—the bad news is
that you have to do all three.

There’s what we might call the scholastic reading. [Pause] What is that? Well, it requires that
you account for doctrine. When taking doctrine into account, I’d tell you, look, all you need is a
dictionary for Empedocles or a book about the history of philosophy. It might be a bad account
or it might be a good account, but it will still be a matter of what’s truthful or accurate
[véridique]; it comes down to what’s true—you know, is it or is it not a true account? Or is it
plausible? There are a few writings from Empedocles, but not many, eh? We don’t really know
what he said. So we try to recount it; with this first reading, then, I’d say sure, right, Empedocles
was a philosopher who thought the world was a perpetual struggle, a confrontation between love
and hate, and that the world goes through cycles—first [Pause] love is dominant, since love
brings things together, and then hate takes over, since hate separates. [Pause] You might say,
okay, that’s interesting. If it’s a good history book, you get a lot of details; if it’s the Petit
Larousse, you don’t get a lot of detail.

With the second possible reading, you’re not trying to intervene… you’re trying to—trying to
bring it to life. Right. [Pause] Because it’s alive. So far as that goes, I suppose, you aren’t even
acting as a professional philosopher. You’re better off not being a professional philosopher. Let’s
say, for example, your name is Romain Rolland, and you write a little book—you’re so taken
with Empedocles that it leads you to write a book titled The Fire of Empedocles11 since
everyone knows that he ended up hurling himself into a volcano. Then that leads… [Interruption
of the recording] [1:15:10]

… “are shunned. Forbidden friendship forms the outer bounds of the chaos it encircles. But lo,
long ago, a crack in the sealed vessel of the world which filled with Hatred. It drips out, slowly,
slowly leaking”—hatred drips, a crack emerges in the world’s vessel, and hatred starts to leak
out—“It drips out, slowly, slowly leaking, and as the level drops, in rushes as its replacement the
beneficent flow of immaculate love. Along the way, separated elements come together and
intermingle. A furrow of life is carved out beneath the plowshare. The reciprocal pressure of
these two rival forces”—love and hate—“whirl into motion amidst the inert chaos. First, Love
goes straight to the center of the world, whence Hate withdraws; and from this primitive nucleus,
this focal point, it gradually recovers, stone by stone, the rest of its empire.”12

Can I just say? This sure sounds like a poet. Has he poeticized the text? No—he’s done better;
he’s energized it from within. In place of two abstract terms—separate, unite—he describes
violent dynamic relationships, centripetal motion, centrifugal motion, cracks in the vase, etc. In
my opinion, there’s something else he’s already helped us understand. But maybe it’s predicated
on us having done the first reading, who can say?

                                                                                                   13

And then I just want to add: there is a third reading. Poetry is still not enough. We also need
philosophy. It would be too easy to simply sprinkle a bit of poetry into the history of philosophy.
That’s not enough. You need philosophy. But what does philosophy consist in? Well, it consists
in asking—not Is any of this true?—but Why are they saying this? Fundamentally, the question
is: why this rather than something else? [Pause] Moreover, what makes us Empedocleans? If we
understand why he makes his claims the way he does… It’s not that we’ll say, no, he’s wrong!
As such a noble and original character, what absolute necessity drove Empedocles to say what he
said? What’s going on here, with this cycle of love and hate? It’s that Empedocles, of course, this
is before Plato, so—I’m treading carefully because I’m trying not to make some catastrophic
blunder—it has to do with Parmenides—goodness, actually, does anyone remember their alleged
time periods, what centuries?13 [muffled comment], anyway, it has to do with Parmenides. I hope
he comes after. Yes. You can always look it up in your handy Larousse. Anyway, it doesn’t
matter. It has to do with Parmenides. For Parmenides, it was really about the formation of the
true world and the truthful man or straight-shooter, which Plato later took back up.

But Empedocles’ point is simple as it is beautiful: get rid of your models. As someone with
divine ancestry, I’m telling you to abolish your venerations. [Pause] And, precisely because he’s
a philosopher, Nietzsche indeed paints a rather grand portrait of Empedocles; Nietzsche instructs
us that, given his divine background, we cannot think of Empedocles as an atheist. What was
Nietzsche getting at? It’s not too far—§13914 … He was reproached for his impiety. It’s a
wonderful passage; Nietzsche begins, Empedocles “comes from an agonal family, and he made a
huge splash in Olympia. He wore purple robes, a golden belt, bronze sandals, and a Delphic
crown upon his head. He wore his hair long and had a permanently dark countenance…”15—
well, hold on, it’s later on, where does it say… where does it say that he wasn’t… that he was
accused of impiety? Anyway. [Pause] Well, I’ll have to track it down; I’m not sure. Anyway,
what was I saying? Right—

Empedocles’ claim is that there is no model. There is no “real deal.” Stop thinking in terms of
models and copies. But then what is there? The only thing that matters [Pause] is not—the
organic is not a copy of a supra-organic model—there is no being or reality apart from the
organic. All of reality, the whole of being, is organic. [Pause] Parmenides began with “being is.”
Empedocles has one simple addendum: “organic being is.” “Living being is.” In other words,
what Empedocles, being of noble birth, desperately wants is the unity of all living things. His
ideas aren’t all that philosophical, they aren’t all that, they aren’t all that new, or what have you.
Try—try to listen for what’s new about this way of speaking. What does it mean to say that there
is a unity in all living things? It means there is no longer a difference between models and
copies; there is no longer a difference between essence and appearance. There are essences, but
what is an essence? Essence is appearance insofar as it is unified by the living—put another way,
what is the unifying force? Essence is appearance insofar as it is united in love. Appearance
unified by love—that’s what essence, or being, is. [Pause]

Afterwards, the word philos radically changes; I’d describe it as a huge, a huge upheaval. From
that moment, philos designates the aftermath. Philias is love or friendship, either one—it is lovefriendship, you can no longer tell which. In everything we encountered before from Plato, it’s no
accident that philosophy is called “philosophy,” because a philosophy is “only” a philosopher,

                                                                                                     14

and the Greeks distinguished between what had long been known as sophos—sages, sophois—
and what were later called philosophois, philosophois. A philosopher is very different from a
sophos. Parmenides is a sage who deals in immutable forms, in marble forms. [Pause] But Plato
is not a sage; Socrates is not a sage. They are philosophers, that is, they copy after models, only
they draw their copies from within. We’ve seen that they are truthful men. Notice that philos, in
this interpretation, is a derivation; it is a copy derived from a model. The philosopher only loves
wisdom [sagesse]; he is not a wiseman [sage]. Alright.

So, it’s significant that philos is derivative. What does Empedocles do? Well, he’s the first to
make love-friendship into the original. [Pause] The original replaces the model, the original
designates something very different from a model. The original is appearance unified by love.
Love is what is constitutive. Love is no longer derivative; it has become constitutive. It is no
longer a question of being a philosopher, strictly speaking; it’s about being a philanthropist. In
the broad sense of anthropos, man—it means man, right—we ought to render it as “friend to
everything living, the unity of all living things.” The philanthropist purports to love all living
things.

And indeed, we know—fortunately, it was time—we know from what little that remains of
Empedocles’ writing that he was very much inspired by the Pythagoreans, and that he longed for
a well-known Pythagorean sort of society—I say well-known because we don’t know much
about it—the so-called “society of friends,” the society of friends. That already sounds like a
novel, almost like a detective novel: the society of true friends, which clearly sounds like some
sort of secret society. So, Empedocles was looking for a society of friends. Immediately, he stops
being—see, we’re really dealing with a second age—he’s no longer a philosopher; he’s become
a philanthropist. This passage from philosophy to philanthropy is rather intriguing. You can
sense that it won’t last long. Again, this philanthropy simply consisted in grasping essence or
being as identical to the whole of appearance united in love. That’s what the original character
was. The original character. [Pause]

Someone who says that—who makes those sorts of claims—is someone who turns love around.
Love is no longer a by-productive but is constitutive of the exchange. Love is what is promised.
He completely inverted philosophy. Supposedly, with philosophy, there is first wisdom and then
love. Philosophers are lovers. Love comes from sophia. Empedocles turns it around: it is the
sophia that derives from love. You might think, sure, but so what? Well, it’s fantastic, this sort of
reversal is the mark of a great philosopher. We can comfortably say, however little we might
have left of Empedocles’ work, Plato didn’t understand it at all. Plato says it’s… either that, no,
either that or he understood all too well—no, I take it back, forgive me, let me back up—or Plato
strived to be a fantastic counter-Empedocles, completely reaffirming love’s submission to
wisdom—anti-Empedocles at its purest. Alright, what then? The plot is thickening. Our puppet
show, we’re well into our second puppet show. Now essence, being, is organic being. There is no
being other than organic being, organic being qua appearance united in love. What sort of world
am I wading through? What is this abominable world? Why isn’t our world united in love? It’s a
real problem, right?

See, I’ve already answered the question why—if only because it leads us to ask how—why, why
does Empedocles tell us this whole story? He tells it to us because his main idea involves turning

                                                                                                  15

love around. As we just saw. But what’s going on? How do we explain that being is appearance
united by love, then? If so, that means our world is lacking in love. That’s not it at all, you
understand, it takes on a completely different form when it’s put that way, the way Nietzsche
presents it in his account of Empedocles. It’s no longer an abstract question of how Empedocles
theorizes a single world with two cycles, that the world passes through two cycles. No, there is a
cycle consisting in a period of love, then a period of hate, and then it starts over, and so on. And
in a way, we know that intuitively, and you think, well, very good, that’s lovely, that’s all well
and good—these Greeks, what was going through their heads? It’s not like that anymore. Both
terms, love and hate, have very different meanings for Empedocles; they’re not even in the same
ballpark. Bear in mind that, once he’s carried out his reversal, once he’s defined being as
appearance united by love, he’s left with the question: but how come appearance isn’t united by
love? Where is the love? It’s gone! It’s gone. What sort of world is this?

We find an incredible passage in Nietzsche. Here what he’s really trying to do is give us a feel
for the life, the life within a philosopher’s way of thinking. “What he tried to impress upon us,
more than anything, was the unity of all living things, how eating meat was like eating
oneself”—like many Pythagoreans, he was a vegetarian—“the murder of our next of kin. What
he wanted for humanity was a monumental cleansing. […] The entirety of his pathos rests on the
idea that all living things are one, gods, humans, and beasts.”16 “The unity of all life is”—this
translation isn’t clear, so pay attention—“the unity of all life is an infinitely more productive
version of Parmenides’ notion of the unity of being.”17

Do you understand? Parmenides conceived of the unity of being, but Empedocles puts it in terms
of the unity of living things, which is much more productive than Parmenides: that’s what this
bad Nietzsche translation is getting at. “What’s been added is that all nature has a deep
sympathy, an overflowing feeling of compassion. The purpose of his existence”—Empedocles’
existence—“appeared to be making amends for the evils caused by hatred, spreading the idea of
unity in love throughout a world of hatred and strife, and lending his support wherever he finds
suffering, the product of hatred. He trudges through this world of torment and contradiction.”18
Where is love? That’s what haunts Empedocles. Divinely handsome, being himself of divine
descent, trudging along, asking: Where is love? In Nietzsche’s own writing, Zarathustra wanders
around in a similar fashion, suffice it to say. And Zarathustra will also be Empedoclean, in the
sense that he turns love and wisdom around, such that love no longer comes from wisdom;
wisdom comes from love.

Well, let’s see, [Pause] what could have prevented such unification, Empedocles wonders. Here
we come back to hatred. Hate must have taken hold of appearance. In order for appearance to not
be united in love, in other words, if we want for the unity of all living things, appearance must
have been taken over by hatred. In other words, behind appearances lies an evil will. [Pause]
Behind appearances lies an evil, obtuse will, which prevents their being unified by love. We have
to track this obtuse will down; we must fight off this evil will behind appearances. We are no
longer… behind appearances; on the other side there are essences, there are models. Now we
aren’t on the other side! Hatred is at work behind appearances, preventing love from unifying all
of appearance. And I, Empedocles, will take up my spear and sword, and I will strike out behind
appearances at this stubborn, evil will, which we call hatred.

                                                                                                  16

Feel the drama. — Some of you have been quick to put another name alongside Empedocles’,
several other names even—And I’ll take up my spear to root out… — I’m not quoting anything.
We’re just playing around. It’s in your… in… — And I will take my spear and track down the
stubborn will behind appearances which prevents appearance from being united in love. See, it’s
getting… It might strike you as a totally crazy idea; it’s not what you could call run of the mill.
Working out a history of philosophy, you go, alright, there’s Empedocles, and then there’s soand-so, and you make a list. There’s Parmenides, there’s Empedocles, there’s Heraclitus, and so
on. It’s the same thing here; we have to go through the same task with them all: discover the why
and how behind their thought. What matters isn’t what someone says; it’s why they say it, how
they say it, what leads them to say it, what it has to do with them. If you don’t understand why it
matters to them, not as an individual, but what’s going on at a deeper level—the problem that’s
killing them, the problem they live for, the problem that’s killing them—you haven’t understood
anything; most of all, you’ve failed to understand your own problems.

Right, well, I claim—there’s one passage I just have to mention. You’ll recognize it [It’s from
Moby Dick]—“Hark ye yet again—the little lower layer. All visible objects, man, are but as
pasteboard masks.”—“All visible objects…”—perhaps better described as appearances, [since]
all visible objects are appearances—“All visible objects […] are but as pasteboard masks. But in
each event—in the living act, the undoubted deed…”—according to this passage, these are
synonyms for masks, they’re nothing but pasteboard masks; all visible objects are pasteboard
masks, and so too are living acts and undoubted deeds. “In the living act, the undoubted deed
[…] there, some unknown but still reasoning thing”—some unknown but reasoning thing
appears—“some unknown but still reasoning thing puts forth the moldings of its features from
behind the unreasoning mask.”

Translating that: everything is a mask, everything is appearance. However, notice that I wanted
to unify appearances with love, and this isn’t unified by love. It is separated, it is fragmented by
something fundamentally evil: hatred. Behind the mask, there is something rational. “If man will
strike”—if the original character, if I, original character, will strike, if man will strike—“strike
through the mask!” What a sublime sentence, everything in this book is incredible. Behind
visible objects, the pasteboard masks, there is an unknown but still reasoning thing behind the
masks. If man should strike, let him strike through the mask.

It goes on: “How can the prisoner reach outside except by thrusting through the wall”—you’ll
recognize it right away—“To me, the white whale is that wall, shoved near to me. Sometimes I
think there’s naught beyond.” Sometimes I think there’s nothing beyond appearance. “But ‘tis
enough. He tasks me; he heaps me; I see in him”—that is, within him, behind him—“outrageous
strength, with an inscrutable malice sinewing it. That inscrutable thing is chiefly what I hate; and
be the white whale agent, or be the white whale principal, I will wreak that hate upon him. Talk
not to me of blasphemy, man; I’d strike the sun if it insulted me. For could the sun do that, then
could I do the other; since there is ever a sort of fair play herein, jealousy presiding over all
creations.”

I’ll stop there because I end up sounding like Empedocles verbatim. The battle of hatred presides
over all creation. And you can see why it presides over all creation. It’s a famous passage; it’s
Captain Ahab’s famous speech in Moby Dick. Where Ahab says no, I’m not looking for revenge

                                                                                                  17

against Moby Dick. I’d argue that Ahab here is Empedocles. As I see it, Empedocles had three
lives; yes, that will do, three lives—especially since Empedocles believed in reincarnation… in
one life he wore the guise of Don Quixote, and then in the next, he came back as Captain Ahab.

Why Don Quixote? It’s certainly not because he’s a guy who gets things wrong. It’s certainly not
because he has hallucinations; I mean, he does have hallucinations, but he is a great seer, a
visionary. Which isn’t to say he’s not hilarious, right? It’s pretty funny. I don’t know what your
sense of humor is like, but it’s extremely funny. A visionary. Yes, obviously, he’s a crackpot. If
you see—if you see what lies behind things, you’re a crackpot. The problem with such people,
with original characters, isn’t that they see what’s above; that’s a good thing for Plato, that’s…
[Laughter] That’s fine, that’s how we get Platonist Christianity, whereas there can’t be an
Empedoclean Christianity, you know. For Empedocles, there is nothing over and above things!
Christians and Platonists can work together because… there are “Ideas,” but you can sneak God
in there along with Ideas. But… It doesn’t even occur to Empedocles that something should exist
overhead! The sky! The sky belongs to the living; gods are of the living no less than beasts, as
someone like Nietzsche might put it. He could have added the sky, beasts, gods, and so on, to the
unity of living things. The unity of living things that only love ensures.

But our world is one of division. We ought to have Being—that is, not something other than
appearance, not something from up high. We ought to have Being down here. Empedocles says it
is here. And Being down here is appearance united in love. That’s all we require. Which implies
turning love around, turning the concept of love around such that… We don’t have it. Because
behind appearances there lies something which prevents love’s unification. That something is
hate. Well, we’ll have to track down this will to hate, this hateful will. The original, uh, the
original character will need to take up his spear and strike behind appearances, the pasteboard
masks, to strike behind the pasteboard masks, which we hope and pray would take on a life of
their own, once unified by love—as soon as they can be unified by love, they will cease to be
pasteboard masks.

But what prevents these pasteboard masks from coming to life is that behind them resides a
devious will, for which they are either agent or principal. 19 What does it matter? There is hatred.
Alright, we have to take up our swords against this hatred, we have to overcome this hatred, and
Don Quixote charges behind the pasteboard masks to get at something behind them, and Captain
Ahab launches his ship which perishes just as Don Quixote will end; Captain Ahab will perish in
his endeavor to reach what he will eventually call the Leviathan, behind the pasteboard masks.
However, you can sense the drama, the tragedy. Where is the drama? The original character,
having begun as a philanthropist, a lover, revolutionizing love. Where does he end up? He finds
himself face to face with hate, falling victim to hate. He’s gone over to the other side; he’s been
drawn in behind the pasteboard mask. And he winds up with hate against hate. [Pause] He
awakens hatred and returns it.

And Empedocles despises it. Not just the world, but those who detract from its unification in
love. He’s overcome by what Nietzsche calls the “great disgust.” He ceases to be a philanthropist
and becomes what, in The Confidence-Man, Melville calls a “surly philanthropist,” a surly
philanthropist. Not quite the same thing as a misanthrope, but he sort of winds up being a
misanthrope. In fact, the surly philanthropist is someone who says: there is nothing but

                                                                                                      18

pasteboard masks. And behind them, an obtuse will. He’s gone to the other side. Which brings us
back to something we’ve been toying with since the start of the year. It’s not enough to define
crystal formations; there is something inside them. He’s gone over. It’s true of Captain Ahab,
and it’s true of Empedocles—Empedocles hurls himself into a volcano. And it was true of Don
Quixote; it’s the tragedy of what’s true [le drama du vrai], and it continues to be, as we’ve just
seen, when it comes to the original character.

Alright, are you all still with me? Well, I’m going to move rather quickly; I’m just giving you an
outline. We’d have to work out a lot of the details, right?

The third stage. Alright. Where does that leave us? I was saying, with the first stage, the truthful
man fell apart. He’s shattered to pieces. The marble has crumbled away, right. And that’s
Bartleby. It all ends with Bartleby. That’s what happens with the straight-shooter or truthful man.
Then we have the original character, who did not collapse. He didn’t fall apart, but he went over
to the other side, right? He was lured over, right? He was dragged down by his harpoon, right?
He’s gone over to the other side of the pasteboard mask. In other words, he’s gone over to
hatred. What worse could have happened to him? He raised philosophy to the level of
philanthropy, and then became a “surly philanthropist.” His last resort is to throw himself into a
volcano or to throw himself into mortal combat. Captain Ahab. End of Act II.

But in the end, he’s moved on to the other side, and we shouldn’t forget that, eh? Because it’ll
come back. Act III: all levity. It will be a ballet. We should make it into a ballet. We’d have
everything we need to turn it into a ballet. I’ll stop there, I’ll leave it at that, because in the next
trimester we’ll perform a ballet with… [Laughter] We’ll have costumes, and so on. Everything
we need. You can already imagine the costume for the original character. [Laughter] It’s a little
tricky, eh, with the marble man, or what have you. The marble man. We’ll have to ask [Patrice]
Chéreau, which is perfect because he has everything, right? We’ll have a costuming workshop.
Everything we need, right? Yeah, that’s what we’ll do. Costuming, playwriting, everything. The
whole shebang.

So, Act III. The whole thing is in… it’s all in—how do I put this? Everything is in repose. There
are strange voices—strange, soothing voices saying, Come now, let’s not exaggerate. What is it?
What’s wrong, huh? It’s not that bad! What’s gotten into you? Listen. No, look. People aren’t so
bad. Of course not. True, we don’t have truth, but we’re getting closer. We can get closer to it if
we try; it takes effort to realize that humanity is good. And anyway, there are laws. Humanity
might be evil if it weren’t for laws, but there are laws. What’s going on? All of these calming
voices we so desperately need? I might argue that they emanate from ordinary characters, or that
they bear upon ordinary characters.

We’re told: Nonsense—what are you talking about? All this about love and hate. Now you’re
Don Quixote! You’re the real Don Quixote! No need for that! It’s not that bad! In other words,
it’s the small voice of fat Sancho speaking, or else it’s the voice of Captain Ahab’s officers
saying: Moby Dick might be more terrifying, but he is still a whale like any other! Let’s hunt a
different one! Stick to ordinary whales. Either that or it’s what, in a splendid passage from Moby
Dick, Melville calls an “easy sort of despair.” But we get a term in The Confidence-Man that

                                                                                                   19

works just as well: “the genial misanthrope.” See, it’s only natural that the “genial misanthrope”
comes after the “surly philanthropist.”

So, the genial misanthrope is someone who says, alright. It’s fine, that’s… people aren’t worth
much. You don’t have to make a big production out of it. It’s nothing out of the ordinary. But,
hearing that—“It’s nothing out of the ordinary”—if you recall, this might be an opportunity to go
back to the novel I mentioned earlier, a series I love, written by Maurice Leblanc, where the
protagonist, Balthazar, is a professor of everyday philosophy at a girls boarding school.20
Professor Balthazar’s everyday philosophy entailed that any adventure that may befall you
actually has a simple explanation. Hold on, you see, it’s totally normal. And he falls… And as
Balthazar runs into all sorts of strange, absurd disasters—he also has a bit of Empedocles, but
really there’s a bit of everything thrown in—this professor of everyday philosophy counts as an
ordinary character.

And then, since I’m always circling back to this great, bizarre novel by Melville, The
Confidence-Man; is it a coincidence that The Confidence-Man is broken down into three levels?
A type of speech uniformly shared by a series of characters we can’t yet pin down, a strangely
comfortable, philanthropic kind of speech—distinct from Empedocles—a philanthropic form of
speech along the lines of the genial misanthrope. Where things aren’t so serious, and there’s this
whole series of characters throughout The Confidence-Man linked together as parts of a general
discourse of “No, it’s not as bad as you think.” Ordinary speech directed at misanthropes, against
misanthropes. It explicitly says as much in the text, right? It’s speech “against” misanthropy,
“against” surly philanthropists. [Pause] And this kind of speech directed against misanthropy or
surly philanthropy is the speech of genial philanthropists, of the people—it’s ordinary speech.
What sort of people use it? That’s a question for later. Anyway.

You might be wondering: what is it? In a way, this speech—what would ordinary speech be? It’s
a form of speech we might think of as “legal discourse.” [Pause] Ordinary characters talk in
terms of law. But we need to understand: What is the law? It is the arrangement of perspectives.
Law is the combination of perspectives such that perspectives no longer collide. [Pause] There is
an art to composing perspectives so that people can work together. It’s the art of using a
particular relation to distinguish between other relations. It is a discursive art; discourse is what
makes law. This is why ordinary characters express themselves according to the discourse, the
speech of ordinary life. Law is supposed to arrange perspectives, to put perspectives together—
I’m moving quickly because I’m running out of time; we would need examples to examine
these…—In other words, it imposes common perspectives. Like what? It’s intriguing to think
about common perspectives. It gives us a new type of perspective, a third major type of
perspective, right: common perspectives. We ought to consider how they’re related to particular
perspectives. Not just any perspective will do. [Only some] are combinable perspectives, right.
That is how the law operates. Alright.

But what about the Greeks; how did the Greeks do it? For them, it was very simple: their speech
was built around nomos; it was nomos, which is usually roughly translated as “law.” And the
Greeks opposed—or at some point, they begin to oppose nomos to physis. [Pause] And then,
based on what we know, one of the greatest Sophists, it seems—I even made sure to double
check in the Larousse—the earliest who claimed to be the philosopher of nomos, and his speech

                                                                                                     20

was—his name was Protagoras—and his discourse went along the lines of: well, listen, from the
point of view… from nature’s point of view, things are going rather poorly, eh, there is neither
true nor false; ultimately, there is nothing at all, the perfect expression of what Nietzsche would
later call “nihilism.” There are just perceptions, but these perceptions differ, i.e., it’s a matter of
appearance. There are appearances, and everyone perceives things in their own way. There is
no… Everyone has their own way of looking at things. But that’s fine, really, everything’s
okay—it all works out because, listen—I, Protagoras, I claim that it’ll work out once we
compose our perspectives. We will simply put them together: it may be that all perceptions are
equally true or false; nevertheless, they aren’t equal. They have different values. [Interruption of
the recording] [2:01:07]

Part 3

… we end up with a composition of perspectives, and that’s what we call nomos. And there is
no…there is no…there is no being, there is no nature, there is no physis; there is only nomos.
And that’s how Protagoras proceeds.

This is what Melville—I haven’t had time to read it for you yet—what he so neatly calls the
genial misanthrope, you know, we’re all surrounded by genial misanthropes. We meet them all
the time, it’s amazing—it’s a sort of discourse that blends a sort of cynical attitude with extreme
platitudes. You know, the sort who think it’s worth pointing out that people inherently fear the
police, who think that idea is at all meaningful—it’s a very peculiar way of talking. People have
come back from it, right, they’ve… It hasn’t happened to me. No, it’s not so bad. It hasn’t
happened to me; it can’t be as bad as you say. [Laughter] Melville has done a wonderful job of
depicting it. In Moby Dick, in The Confidence-Man, you get excellent descriptions of this manner
of speech. But in Moby Dick there is what he calls an “easy sort of despair,” this time on a boat,
where it really is the discourse held by ordinary characters. It’s a poor sailor, so it’s a multifaceted form of speech. It’s Protagoras aboard a ship, getting seasick.

“When a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke, though the wit thereof he but
dimly discerns, and more than suspects that the joke is at nobody’s expense but his own.
However, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worthwhile disputing. He bolts down all events,
all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and invisible, never mind how
knobby; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints. And as for small
difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and
death itself, seem to him only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by
the unseen and unaccountable old joker.”21

You know how when you get up in the morning, ordinarily speaking, and then you receive a
huge blow on the head, and you’re laid out, bleeding. And then you think, well, my day’s off to a
good start. That’s what Melville is talking about. “And death itself [seems] to him only sly,
good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the unseen and unaccountable old
joker.” “That odd sort of wayward mood I am speaking of, comes over a man only in some time
of extreme tribulation; it comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before
might have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general joke.”

                                                                                                21

We thought we were Empedocles, through and through—and then all of a sudden, we think,
What am I doing here? Don Quixote snaps out of it—what am I doing here? It’s part of the farce.
“There is nothing like the…”—here’s where Moby Dick comes in—“There is nothing like the
perils of whaling to breed this free and easy sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I
now regarded this whole voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.” Easy and
genial despair, nothing matters—it can’t be that bad. That’s what’s happening. All I’m saying is
that, if he were to fit in the Sophist Protagoras, this might be where he’d do it, when it comes to
nomos and the composition of perspectives.

Fourth—I’m really going to pick up the pace because I’ve had enough, and I sense that you have
asl well. What, you don’t… you’re fine? We’ll wrap it up then, okay? But anyway, fourth, I have
to go back—I have to double back to the original character. The original character reaches
behind the mask. That was fine when it was Empedocles, or when it was Don Quixote. But he
had already turned into a surly philanthropist—more or less a misanthropist, frighteningly
misanthropic. He might have hated hatred, [but] he hated hatred so much that all he had was
hate, nothing but hatred. He became a hateful man. Empedocles killed himself before—we can
probably assume that Empedocles killed himself—threw himself into a volcano so as to not
become hateful. Ahab remains a great philanthropist, i.e., someone with a sense for the unity of
all living things. But at what cost? He goes behind the mask. He moves on to the other side.
However, he gets killed by the white whale. Then… we won’t get into Don Quixote. His purity
protects him. But the others, the ones who went on, former Empedocles, perhaps—they are men
of hate, or seem like it.

And indeed, [Pause] as radically evil men, they fundamentally renounce the love that unifies all
living things. They’ve entered into the service of hatred, which kills everything mortal and for
which death never comes soon enough. Their perspective is depraved. They are the kind of
person whom Plato insightfully called “depraved according to nature.” And it so happens that,
centuries later, Herman Melville writes a wonderful novella, Billy Budd, where the protagonist
[is]… [Pause] to quote Melville himself, someone “depraved according to nature”: the ship’s
chief engineer, who goes by the name Mac Claggart. And Melville specifically says—I don’t
have time to read it, but it’s another one of Melville’s short masterpieces—Melville explains that
he is depraved according to nature. He says you need clerical training to detect it, even if you
have worldly experience. You might be a very skilled psychologist, but you will still fail to spot
depravity according to nature. Because someone depraved according to nature is sick; they’ll
fool you. It takes a clerical background—and what does that mean? You need eyes like
Empedocles. It would take someone like Empedocles. That’s what Empedocles diagnosed as
what’s behind the mask. That’s what he was diagnosing. [Pause]

There’s a lengthy passage describing Mac Claggart’s eyes and eye color. Particularly when he’s
scheming something. Claggart is already handsome, right, but he gets even more handsome when
he’s plotting something. His eyes, see, becomes “strangely suffused,” in some of Melville’s
finest descriptions of eyes. There is, well, only one American and one Englishman have been
able to capture eyes in writing. [Algernon Charles] Swinburne, near the start of his major novel22
and possibly Melville in Billy Budd, in this fantastic description of Mac Claggart’s eyes when
he’s plotting.23

                                                                                                   22

Right. That’s a depraved perspective. That’s a depraved perspective. Only, it turns out that they
aren’t unique; their uniqueness has much deeper roots. They are degenerate descendants of
Empedocles; they are deteriorated descendants of an original character. I say “depraved
perspective” as it’s commonly used in art or aesthetics. It’s a very particular sort of perspective;
see a writer whose work has been reprinted, [Jurgis] Baltrusaitis, who described “depraved
perspective” in painting. It’s fascinating; it’s about anamorphosis.

But to cut a long story short: their uniqueness is only apparent. Mac Claggart—that’s not, that’s
not really how it is. In fact, in fact, such characters form a sort of chain. They form a kind of
chain, I think, where each one waits his turn. Why did we have to go through the ordinary
character earlier? Because for an ordinary character, the discourse of nomos, [Pause] or even
reasonable discourse, the discourse of reason, works just fine. They use reason, as is duly noted
by… [Deleuze doesn’t finish his sentence] And Melville offers an apt, psychiatric label for these
depraved perspectives, these corrupted, evil figures. He refers to “monomania.”24 Indeed it’s
what they called “monomania” in the 19th century. In the 19th century, monomania referred to
delusional actions rather than delusional ideas, that is, it referred to people who—you might live
with them for years; they’re fine, totally reasonable. Then, all of a sudden—as I was saying, for
the longest time, they lead normal lives; there’s nothing delusional about their way of thinking—
and then all of a sudden, they do something explosive, they kill someone where… it doesn’t
make any sense—why did they do it? Why murder? Why? Or they start a fire.

So, monomania is a major theme in the 19th century. It plagued the 19th century—terrorizing both
city and countryside alike. Because it was the lower classes, the working class, who had
monomania. Obviously delusional ideas were off limits; they wouldn’t dare say anything.
Delusional ideas were reserved for the rich, the bourgeoisie; commoners only ever had
monomania… i.e., delusional acts. They set fires in the countryside, they burned those, oh, you
know… What? [Pause] What are they called? [Pause] You know, the wheat…

A Student: Bales?

Deleuze: That’s not it…

A Student: Haystacks? Barns?

Deleuze: Ah, yes, that is it. There we go. I was sort of thinking about how they burned hay bales.
And in the city, there were murders, murders committed by maids. So, between peasants starting
fires—between simple peasants setting hay bales on fire and maids killing their bosses,
psychiatrists had a problem on their hands, and a big one. Whereas, when it came to the
bourgeoisie, I was really struck reading 19th century psychiatry. I have never—I don’t think I’ve
ever found an instance of bourgeois monomania. It always refers to common people. Always.
Obviously, there were bourgeois monomaniacs, but that doesn’t matter; it corresponded… With
the bourgeoisie, you had to… there were monomaniacs, but back then they let it slide, I think,
they left them alone. We let them go, we slapped them on the wrist, and we may have kept our
eye on them, but they never show up in any textbooks. They had the right to their big delusional
ideas, eh? But anyway, where was I going with that? Ah, yes, that’s how I would describe these
characters; they come in series. And this is—it must be said—coming back around, they might

                                                                                                     23

well be devolutions of the original character, but they’re the ones we ought to call “odd
characters” [hommes remarquables].

Why “odd character”? Because… And why do they come fourth, after the third one? Since the
third traded in the discourse of ordinary life and ordinary time. — I didn’t bring up time before
because we’re running long; it will always be up to you to bring things back to time— It’s the
discourse of ordinary life. And they are defined because they expect horror. Mac Claggart waits
a very long time for his chance to corner the handsome Billy Budd. [Pause] Right, but then, if
they’re biding their time, indeed, even when they’re all the Mac Claggart type, technically
speaking they are not alone. There’s still a series of odd characters. There is a series of odd
characters, a whole series of odd characters; each has his hour and waits for his time to come,
huddled in a corner in the ordinary flow of time and life. [Pause]

Hence [Pause] I point to three, to three things. In Melville’s novel, The Confidence-Man, who
uses a philanthropic discourse about ordinary life, e.g., “Oh, it’s not so bad”? [Pause] I’ve
mentioned this whole series of bizarre figures. Remember, we start with a mute albino writing on
a placard, followed by a crippled black man, who is seized upon by misanthropes claiming,
“You’re putting us on!” Perennial themes in Melville’s work. “You’re faking.” And he says,
“No, someone will vouch for me,” and then there are his intercessors, so, there’s the albino, the
black man, and then—I can’t remember what order they’re in, but I’ve been over this, and you
can check for yourself—the man with the hat… the man with the gray tie, the man… etc.,
forming a series of odd characters who all use the same ordinary speech—“It’s not so
serious!”—each waiting for his chance to carry out a sequence and do something which we can
assume is a scam. Either that, or [if not a scam] something quite different, affirming their power,
throughout this whole series of odd characters.25

So, you see, I can now finally tie off something we left hanging earlier: ordinary speech, the
discourse of the ordinary character, [Pause] is opposed to the discourse of misanthropes, i.e.,
truthful men, or what will become truthful men. Their opposition takes the form of “Come on,
don’t be like that; it’s not that serious,” but they get caught up in a chain of odd characters who
benefit from this “everything is ordinary” discourse, each one jumping, pouncing when the time
is right, striking while the iron is hot, and basing their power on a sequence from ordinary life,
turning it to their advantage.

Then what can we glean from the little we know about the Sophists? Recalling my suggestion at
the very start of the year: it’s all too easy to Plato and the Sophists against each other, [but] that’s
not how it is, as [Eugène] Dupréel’s book makes clear.26 We find another major Sophist who
went even further into nihilism than Protagoras—his name was Gorgias, and he seems to have
gone very far with nihilism, and just as there is a Platonic dialogue, Gorgias… [I mean]
Protagoras, Plato also has a dialogue titled The Gorgias.

Based on what we know, what does The Gorgias say? What interested him—something he
shared in common with Protagoras was that he did not believe in physis, much less in pure Ideas.
But contrary to Protagoras—he was quite different, he wasn’t really appealing to nomos—He did
invoke a concept dear to the Greeks. Again, it would take hours to get into it, because it’s such a
strange notion, very… After the break, if someone is able to speak more on it, who knows, who

                                                                                                  24

knows—[it’s] kairos, what the Greeks called kairos: k-a-i-r-o-s. [Pause] Kairos is the right time,
the opportune moment. All I can think of is something from music, right. Something
American—my pronunciation always irks me—I think, I forget whether it’s always used in the
same sense, but in jazz it’s called “timing.” “Timing” is not—it isn’t tempo. It means the right
moment for one of the improvisers to intervene, the right time, for example, to bring in a trumpet
solo. “Timing” is really about the right time, the opportune moment, right. I don’t know if it’s
always used that way. When to hop in or out. Some people don’t have timing, always starting or
stopping when they shouldn’t. [Laughter] But some people have it… it’s…27

But Gorgias was moralizing; understand, I don’t want to cast Gorgias in a bad light. What we do
know is that he attributed a fundamental importance to kairos because, for him, that was the true
object of science, of discourse. Thus, it’s quite different from Protagoras. It’s not that discourse
is meant to establish law by way of a composition or a hierarchy of perspectives. According to
Gorgias, the true object of discourse, of rhetoric, is intervening at the right moment. Learning to
wait as long as it takes. Intervening at the right moment, seizing your opportunity, to be a man
[sic] of kairos. And that’s why… that’s how he defines what he calls “just.” What is justice?
Justice means intervening at the right moment. Wisdom means intervening at the right moment.
At the end of the day, some of what you find in Socrates and Plato is most directly addressed to
Gorgias’ thesis, which is rather interesting.

And what’s particularly interesting is how Gorgias takes turns in Plato’s dialogue. Gorgias gets
fed up arguing with Socrates, right, and he hands off to another Sophist named Polus, then
ultimately to a young, great Sophist—so, there are three of them—the spectacular young
Callicles, who treats Socrates in a way Socrates has never been before. See, I find this interesting
because each of them intervenes at a propitious moment, down the line of all three Sophists in
The Gorgias; I find that really fascinating.

So, what does that mean, then? See, it goes without saying that, well, you should read it, of
course. There’s another great text… If you’re looking at a series of odd characters, yeah, if
you’ve been following along, I could argue that you find a rising series of powers. It’s the series
of higher and higher powers we’re always talking about, ever since the beginning of this year’s
endeavor—what happens in the crystal-image, what happens in crystalline formations. I told you
that you always get a series of frauds or falsifiers. And here it is again: our line of frauds or
falsifiers—a series of frauds, each intervening in turn.

And it is a rising series of powers, since in Melville, the chain of falsifiers, the chain of crooks,
evidently turn out to be one and the same group, one and the same character, one and the same
event, one and the same society—I don’t know—this whole chain ends in the most spectacular of
them all, known as “the cosmopolitan.” So, we go from the albino mute to the talkative
cosmopolitan, the cosmopolitan master of discourse, comprising this whole series of frauds or
falsifies, the escalating power of the false.

I’d argue that the main text bringing all our authors together is—it isn’t the last book of
Zarathustra, since Zarathustra doesn’t have a final book; it was never completed—it’s the last
published book of Zarathustra, the fourth and final part; we find it in the fourth and final part—
and that’s what you should read if you read nothing else. Remember our goal; obviously, you

                                                                                                     25

might not read everything I reference, but of the things I cite, try to read something you haven’t
read yet. If that’s Melville, great. But if some of you haven’t read Zarathustra, even if you’ve
never even opened the book, it doesn’t matter—Start with the fourth book. Go straight to the
fourth part; you don’t need to read anything before that. —

Here’s what happens in the fourth book: Zarathustra hears a cry, a multiple cry. [Pause] Yes, it’s
a cry, a multiple cry. Then in a long procession, he meets everyone behind said cry. We go
through a list, a parade of scoundrels, frauds or falsifiers, each more powerful than the last, all
calling themselves—no, I believe it’s Nietzsche who calls them this—“higher men.” Whatever
you do, don’t mistake these “higher men” for the übermensch. These “higher men” are wild
scoundrels, frauds or falsifiers, yeah, all of them are frauds or falsifiers. So, it’s fascinating
because Nietzsche’s list is quite beautiful; it’s a sublimely poetic, philosophical passage.28

I’ll list them in order. First, there’s the soothsayer, and the soothsayer isn’t the sort to hide. He
ends up telling Zarathustra: I’ve still got you, eh? Everyone tells him… And at times, Zarathustra
replies—He admires them. Zarathustra’s response is rather ambiguous; he despises them, but he
also admires them quite a bit. As to why he admires them, we would need—we would need to
take a closer look at Nietzsche to see why he admires them, be we don’t have time. Let’s just say
that he admires them—well, he runs into them; there’s this soothsayer, weariness, fatigue, he
can’t even lift his arm, every effort is in vain, futile. It’s the discourse of great weariness. There’s
nothing to be done; it’s all in vain. [Pause]

Second, there are [Pause] two kings, two kings pulling along an ass. [Pause] This time, it’s not
about a great weariness; it’s a question of morality. They bring up morality, especially on the
subject of good manners. One of the kings represents the process of such education, while the
other represents the supposed completion of such an education. And both are disgusted, saying,
“The people are all gone.” It’s no longer about fatigue with the two kings; it’s about morality.
[Pause]

Third is the man with the leech, a marvel, a marvel, the man with the leech. He’s a man halfstuck in a swamp, and he pulls out a bloody arm with a leech attached. From his speech, we learn
that he’s the man of knowledge. Science is his concern, right. It is science, and he claims that it’s
better to thoroughly understand one little than to understand the whole world halfway. Thus, he
says, “I will understand the leech.” We’ve met people like that; they might even specialize in just
part of the leech because the subject of leeches as such seems much too broad. And it’s useful;
it’s no laughing matter since it makes invaluable contributions to scientific progress. So,
evidently, he determined that he had to experience leeches in order to understand leeches. And
experiencing leeches meant living with leeches. We’ve all seen it. Every physicist thinks they
need to live alongside their particles. So, he lives there with his leech, and he realizes that only
the leech knows what leeches are. It troubles him because, well, it troubles him [because] he’s a
scientific fraud, or rather, [because] science has become a power of the false.

And then, after the leech man, he meets the magician, and doesn’t the magician seem like the
biggest scoundrel of the lot? You’re free to form your own opinion, but to me, he’s the worst, the
worst, most repugnant fraud. Shimmying about, he’s a repulsive, drooling, wiggling old man
who delivers a great poem about pity. This poem on pity is written by Nietzsche, titled,

                                                                                                26

“Ariadne’s Lament,” “Ariadne’s Lament,” addressed to Dionysus. Ariadne’s Lament is one of
the most beautiful poems, and it starts like this:

“Who will warm me, who loves me still? / Give me hot hands! Give me braziers for my heart! /
Laid out, shuddering, / Like something half-dead whose feet one warms— / Racked, oh! by
unknown fevers, / Shivering from pointy icy arrows of frost, / Hunted by you, thought! /
Unnamable! Disguised! Horrendous one! / You hunter behind clouds!” Etc., etc. “Struck / By
you, cruelest hunter, / You unknown – god!” That’s “Ariadne’s Lament” to Dionysus. Evidently,
it’s a lied. One the one hand, Nietzsche did write lieds, lieders. On the other hand, on the other
hand, he wrote poems which very easily took the form of a lied. It’s actually a sung poem; it’s so
gorgeous. And now the magician takes Ariadne’s song and puts his own grotesque spin on it. It’s
like if a disgusting old man put on a girl’s mask and waddled around like a young girl singing
“Ariadne’s Lament,” and he’s a horrible, unbearable singer.

Then, after the magician we get the last Pope. The last of the Popes, how wonderful. I’ve served
my entire life, and now I have no master, says the last Pope, and this time, it isn’t—notice the
order: morality with the two kings, knowledge with… Well, there’s nothing with the soothsayer,
morality with the two kings, knowledge with the leech man, then religion with the last Pope. He
served God—I served God to the bitter end. He’s even lost an eye, he’s blind in one eye—make
of that what you will—why is he missing an eye? “I am without a master,” the last Pope says. “I
am without a master, and yet I am not free, so I can never be joyful again, except in my
memories.”

Then, after religion and the last Pope, we find the ugliest human being. The ugliest human
being—notice what makes them all frauds or falsifiers. The Pope made out as an old lackey
who’s lost his master, as well as his eye… The magician signing a song he’s stolen from a girl.
The ugliest human being is the one who killed God—so, it’s not in chronological order—he’s the
one who killed God. And this is what I want to highlight, and I’ll tell you why I take it so
seriously: Don’t make the mistake of believing… it’s no secret that the death of God is a
significant theme in Nietzsche’s work. God is dead. But don’t be fooled into thinking that
Nietzsche had any hand in this idea. He does say it. He brings it up all the time, but contrary to
what you find all over Nietzsche scholarship, the idea that “God is dead” is a very old one,
reignited by German Romanticism. Far from being the mastermind behind “God is dead”—
something you find in Hegel’s work, something you find everywhere, something already quite
meaningful—Nietzsche is professing the impotence of this formula. Whatever you do, don’t
lump Nietzsche or his thought in with this “God is dead” business. God might be dead, but—
pardon my vulgarity—Nietzsche is the first one to give a shit.

The very sentence fills him with such joy that he makes additions, always poking fun at it. God is
dead, sure, but he died in a dozen ways, and here are all twelve, and all twelve of them are pretty
funny. [Pause] God is dead, okay, sure. Who killed him? Yeah, he died laughing. God is dead,
sure, he died laughing when he heard that there was only one God. Ultimately, he offers a
thousand versions of God’s death, all of them jokes. And he doesn’t attach any importance to it,
which is why he is so critical of the idea that “God is dead.”

                                                                                                 27

Nietzsche’s claim is that God’s being dead changes nothing, strictly speaking. That’s his
contribution. That’s his innovation, what makes him the perfect counter to Feuerbach. Since, for
[Ludwig] Feuerbach, for example, “God is dead” means that man must take God’s place.
Nietzsche is the first to say, but so long as the place remains, does it matter whether it’s
occupied by man or by God? So, it makes no difference; it doesn’t matter if God is dead—and
that brings him great joy. People who take the sentence, “God is dead,” so seriously never fail to
strike Nietzsche as hilarious. Because for him, he, on the one hand, he presents us with funny
versions of God’s death, and on the other hand, he’ll claim: alright, sure, that doesn’t do anything
for you, it doesn’t gain you anything. Which is why God’s killer is described as “the ugliest
human being,” the ugliest human being. “I could no longer bear God’s pity,” the ugliest human
being says. They had to take God’s place. And for Zarathustra—of everyone Zarathustra meets,
he finds the ugliest the most distasteful. For me, it would be the magician, but again, there’s no
accounting for taste.

What else is there after the ugliest human being? After that, we find the voluntary beggar. Things
feel like they’re coming to a close with the voluntary beggar; he sums everything up. He seeks
the truth. He’s looking everywhere for the truth. Is it in religion? Is it in morality? Is it in
science? No—truth resides with the cows. [Laughter] That’s what we learn from the voluntary
beggar in a striking passage—yes, because cows know how to ruminate. Yeah, so the cows—
where is the kingdom of God? Neither in morality, nor in science, nor in religion. The kingdom
of God is among the cows. Nietzsche had a lot of respect for these animals: cows represent the
unity of all living things.

And then, finally: the shadow. The shadow. And what’s the deal with the shadow? It gets smaller
and smaller, smaller and smaller. You’ve lost your purpose and your domain; it no longer knows.
You have to imagine that this shadow is running scared. The shadow has lost everything; it’s lost
its model, its purpose, its place, and so on. All it has left to do is get smaller and smaller. Why?
Because noon is coming. Incipit Zarathustra, the two passages overlap; now it’s up to
Zarathustra to come on stage. What did he say? Here’s your series of frauds or falsifiers. And as
you read this fourth book, really, I’m asking you to consider what makes each character a fraud?
See for yourself how they are all powers of the false, rising up until the final one, the shadow.
Bear in mind that Nietzsche titled a part of Zarathustra, “The Wanderer and His Shadow.”
Shadows are fundamentally linked to the theme of travel in German Romanticism.

There are these increasingly odd characters [montée d’hommes vraiment remarquables]; a series
of odd characters, of higher men, the series of odd characters, each a fraud or falsifier, each a
greater power of falsity. And just like in Melville’s case, they require ordinary speech. Returning
like a leitmotiv: everything is plebeian today, everything is vulgar, everything is ordinary.

So, what’s left? Well, we’re left with what we announced last time. We still have our fifth step,
namely: why is time and the discourse of ordinary life so important? It’s because, through [time],
the line of frauds rises up, raising from one power to the next every time. [Pause] And it’s
against the backdrop of this, literally, “ordinarity” [Pause] that we finally get to the higher form
of the question of falsity’s power: how to produce something new?

                                                                                                                       28

At that point we don’t have it yet; how will the ordinary, sustained by its chain of frauds, reach a
power of the false that results in novelty? At that point, we’ll have recovered truth. But it won’t
be a closed circle. We’ll once again be able to say, “We’re truthful men, but in a different way,
since being true now means being new.” The creation of something new, the emergence of
novelty within ordinary time at the end of this whole escalating series—the power of the false.
[Pause]

And that’s what Nietzsche is getting at when, once he’s reached the end of these powers of the
false, he announces the appearance of something radically new, what he calls the Übermensch.
It’s what Melville is getting at in Pierre; or, the Ambiguities, when the protagonist, Pierre,
endeavors to produce a book where one is written as an ordinary book, but the other is anything
but ordinary, the emergence of something new. And thus, I read Nietzsche, Melville, and thus, as
I argued, this is the aim of modern philosophy, as opposed to ancient philosophy.29

A reversal which leads Nietzsche to repeat, we, the seekers of truth—far from going back to
Platonism and reintroducing the word… [Deleuze doesn’t finish his sentence] But the idea of the
truthful man has changed completely. The truthful man is no longer someone who copies
preexisting forms, nor someone who finds such forms in marble. The truthful man or straightshooter is someone who invents a new material, who invents something new. That is, they are
creative: what’s true cannot be copied for one simple reason, for one reason alone—because it
waits for us to create it.

There, we’ve gone over everything, all the different levels and stages. We’ll move on to the next
part after the holiday. [End of the session] [2:46:38]

Notes
  “Truth,” “the true,” and “what’s true” here all translate le vrai, which is the “true” in a “true friend” (as opposed to
a “false” one), the “real deal” as opposed to a phony, a “real” designer back rather than a fake.
  The Judith Norman’s translation is followed for Friedrich Nietzsche, “Twilight of the Idols” in The Anti-Christ,
Ecce Homo, Twilight of the Idols, and Other Writings, eds. Aaron Ridley and Judith Norman, trans. Judith Norman
(New York: Cambridge, 2005), p 171.
  The Gay Science, §346.
  While I wish to make every effort to minimize gendered language, homme véridique is best rendered as the
“truthful man.” Contrary to a fraud or falsifier [faussaire], this sort of person “tells it like it is,” “gives it to you
straight,” offers an honest or accurate account, hence the use of “straight-shooter” to emphasize the lack of distortion
or false pretense that highlights its contrast with the fraud or falsifier.
  The French language uses gendered language; Deleuze may have been inspired by Nietzsche’s cast of characters
(described below). To avoid this, terms are adopted from the end of Melville’s The Confidence-Man—original, odd
[remarquables], and ordinary characters.
  The French language refers to someone who “a la science de l’usage,” someone equipped with the knowledge of
use. The expression may refer to one of Plato’s dialogues on Sophism, The Euthydemus. Here a turn of phrase is
borrowed from Benjamin Jowett’s translation—see the collection of dialogues available at
https://standardebooks.org/plato/dialogues/benjamin-jowett .
  The term “fraud” may be more comfortable and accessible than “falsifier,” but both options are available in the
translation of faussaire to help the reader track the term as it appears throughout the seminar.
  “Twilight of the Idols,” §6.
  Bartleby, the Scrivener; A Story of Wall Street, 1853.

                                                                                                                   29

   Chapter 44 of The Confidence Man. There Melville might imply the third sort of character, but this short chapter is
primarily concerned with the first sort, with original characters—including how merely odd characters are
sometimes mistaken for them.
   Rolland’s writings include Empedocles d’Agrigente, ou L’Age de la Haine (Paris: Maison francaise d’art et
d’edition, 1918).
   Rolland, Empedocles… p.26.
   Empedocles: 490-435 BCE. Parmenides: 510-450 BCE.
   Referring to The Gay Science, but the following does not appear there.
   The passage that Deleuze reads may not appear in The Gay Science, but it does appear in Nietzsche’s unpublished
account of the Pre-Socratics. Friedrich Nietzsche, “Die vorplatonischen Philosophen,” (abbreviated DVP) in
Philologica III, Editors, Otto Crusius and Wilhelmina Nestle (Leipzig: Kröner, 1913), pp. 125-234. From page 189.
   DVP, 190f.
   DVP, 191.
   DVP, 191.
   Deleuze’s language has occasionally been adapted to conform to Melville’s.
   See this seminar’s session 3 for “The Extravagant Life of Balthazar”.
   Moby Dick, Chapter 49.
   Swinburne’s posthumous work, Lesbia Brandon (1952).
   See Billy Budd, Chapter 17, Paragraph 2.
   See Billy Budd, Chapter 17, last paragraph.
   For this “series of strange creatures,” see this seminar’s session 2, November 22, 1983, as well as The TimeImage, p. 134.
   The Sophists (Neufchâtel: Griffon, 1948).
   Deleuze refers to kairos in Session 15 on Spinoza, which is also Session 1 of the seminar on Painting, March 31,
1981.
   On the “multiple cry” and these frauds or falsifiers, see The Time-Image, p. 134.
   On “the new” in Melville and Nietzsche, see The Time-Image, pp. 145-147.